Journal of Archaeological Research, Vol. 7, No. 2, 1999Recent Directions and Developments inGeographical Information SystemsKenneth L. Kvamme1Geographical information systems (GIS) are tools for handling and processingspatially referenced information that have permeated all facets of archaeology, fre-quently revolutionizing research by allowing easy access to vast amounts of infor-mation, new ways of data visualization that promote insight through pattern recog-nition, and unique methodologies that allow entirely new approaches to the studyof the past. This comprehensive review examines and critiques recent advancesachieved through GIS in regional and within-site databases, locational analysisand modeling, regional simulation, studies of landscape perception through inter-visibility analysis, and models of spatial allocation, territoriality, and site access.The future prospects of GIS are enormous with the growth of the Internet, the resul-tant linking of databases, expected enhancements in satellite remote sensing, andthe increasing pervasiveness of global positioning systems for spatial data capture.KEY WORDS: geographical information systems; regional analysis; spatial databases; computercartography.If there is a persistent theme that emerges from the chronicles ofcontemporary scientific cartography, it is that the creation of a map almostinevitably leads to unexpected revelations.ŠHall, Mapping the Next Millenium: How Computer-DrivenCartography Is Revolutionizing the Face of ScienceINTRODUCTIONCompetence in data analysis through applied statistics requires a considerableamount of difficult training. It is therefore not surprising that archaeologists and1 Department of Anthropology and Center for Advanced Spatial Technologies, University of Arkansas,Fayetteville, Arkansas 72701.1531059-0161/99/0600.0153$16.00/0 © 1999 Plenum Publishing Corporationother social scientists have turned to user-friendly computers to analyze their datathrough computer graphics and visualization software. Simply by pressing a fewkeys or clicking a mouse button, researchers can instantaneously display vastamounts of information graphically, in multidimensional views and formats notpossible only a few years ago. These tools are beginning to have an impact on theway we conduct archaeological studies because trends, patterns, and relationshipsare so easily visualized, particularly when data are presented in map form.Geographical information systems (GIS) are collections of interrelated com-puter programs designed for the handling and processing of spatially referencedinformation. With data organized on the basis of location, unique capabilities arederived. Information may be assembled according to its position in space anddisplayed in the form of maps, allowing ready visualization of structure and re-lationships in complex regional data sets and creating something of a revolutionin the transmission of information. With modern computer graphics the GIS mapgoes a long way beyond traditional cartographic representation by utilizing contin-uous color palettes, simultaneous displays of multiple spatial variables, simulatedthree-dimensional views, overlays, backdrops, rotations, profiles, and much more.In short, GIS can be regarded as an information visualization engine, but one withextensive analysis, data generation, and manipulative capabilities. These tools,combined in one place, are not only revolutionary, but evolutionary. After all,more than half of the human cortex is involved in vision and designed to readilyperceive pattern in two, three, or higher dimensional views. When viewing a map,the mind erupts with ideas about a landscape, and more so with GIS. There is asynergism that derives from the possibility of comparing a host of environmental,economic, or social variables over the same piece of ground, and GIS permitsregions of any scale to be employed, from that of a continent to the microscopicedge of a stone tool. It leaves small wonder, then, that in little more than a decadeof reasonable access to GIS, it and related cartographic tools have transformed theway academics in virtually every spatial science approach their data-interpretationand problem-solving tasks. [See Hall (1992) for a pan-disciplinary summary.]Historical Roots and OverviewAlthough significant use of GIS in archaeology has existed for little more thana decade, multiple summaries of its historical development have already appeared(Aldenderfer, 1996; Harris and Lock, 1990, 1995; Kvamme, 1995; Maschner,1996a; Savage, 1990a). This development has its roots in the 1970s with com-puter cartography and computer-aided drafting (CAD; Clark, 1979; Copp, 1977),the linking of computer-drawn maps with relational databases (Effland, 1979;Flude et al., 1982), in quantitative spatial analyses and their mapped by-products(Feder, 1979; Larson, 1975), in views and uses of three-dimensional terrain models154Kvamme(Arnold, 1979; Green and Stewart, 1983), in remote sensing and image processingapplications (Ebert, 1978; Scollar, 1966), and in regional simulation and modelingexercises (Chadwick, 1979; Zubrow and Harbaugh, 1978). All of these applica-tions, in some way, performed the functions we now do more routinely with GIS.In the past decade numerous new GIS application areas and problem foci haveevolved, and the number of archaeological users of the technology and publicationsthat have resulted are legion. (A 1995 annotated bibliography of GIS in archaeologyby Petrie et al. cites nearly 400 papers, for example.) Aldenderfer (1992) recentlyclassified these uses of GIS in three levels. The first involves using GIS to do thesimple things we have always done. The second employs GIS to perform complexoperations we seldom or almost never do. The third applies GIS in brand newways that revolutionize our thinking and approaches to the study of archaeologicalphenomena. Yet, very few overviews and critiques of GIS in archaeology havebeen written. The most comprehensive essay, by Kvamme (1989), is nearly adecade old and predates many application areas of the technology as well assome of the technology itself! More recent summary papers have focused only onparticular domains of GIS or are mere introductions to the technology that makeno pretense of being a comprehensive review (e.g., Aldenderfer, 1996; Harrisand Lock, 1990, 1995; Limp, 1996; Maschner, 1996). This situation begs for anintensive examination of archaeology and GIS as it exists today. To what extentdo we employ GIS to do complex things we seldom do or brand new revolutionarythings? What exactly are archaeologists doing with GIS? Why is it so popular?Is it really useful? Are there common domains of application and inquiry? Thispaper addresses these questions.Our tour of GIS begins with a brief overview of its capabilities for thoseunfamiliar with the technology and points to major archaeological references onthe topic. The general introduction continues with an examination of the profoundimpact of GIS on data exploration and visualization and its influence on archaeo-logical and other scientific research. I necessarily review pattern discovery in thesciences and its role in theory building and the scientific cycle.With state-supported mandates for cultural resource databases at local, re-gional, and national levels, the principal use of GIS already lies in this domain,and consequently our survey of applications begins here. Inevitably, every regionaround the globe will some day move toward GIS or GIS-like databases that link in-formation with maps. In recent years, though, this GIS database concept has playedan increasingly important role in site-level projects, the next focus of our survey. Atthe site level, extensive data collection through excavation and surface mappingsof artifacts, topography, and other features commonly occur, and GIS is necessaryto efficiently manage these data and address fundamental research and spatial anal-ysis questions. One kind of within-site information is derived from ground-basedgeophysical prosection, commonly employed in northern Europe and increasinglyin North America. The discussion on remote sensing anticipates a movement,Recent Directions in GIS155already underway, toward GIS for handling and processing these complex spatialdata sets and incorporating them into comprehensive site databases. With sen-sors moved off the ground and into space, GIS has a functionality for analyzingand manipulating remotely sensed satellite imagery, and I review archaeologicalapplications in this domain as well.The most exciting developments in GIS are in the analytical arena, for it is herethat we actually see new research topics and strategies never before contemplated.Because GIS allows actual landscapes and environments to be digitally captured,most of these approaches focus in some way on locational behavior, landscapeuse, settlement choice, and territoriality at the regional level. Although there wasinitially wide variation in approaches to these topics, distinctive and well-definedmethodologies have evolved. The first section examines locational analysis at theregional level where a variety of statistical analysis approaches have been madepossible through GIS to assess quantitatively site or settlement relationships withfeatures of environment and address the fundamental question of why peopleplaced their settlements where they did. The second section builds on what islearned through locational analysis by combining results in a multivariate senseto make predictive statements about archaeological distributions. Archaeologicalpredictive modeling is one of the earliest applications made possible by GIS, yetit continues to grow in importance as a tool for cultural resource management andplanning and, indeed, now forms the basis of a multimillion dollar archaeologicalindustry.The next two sections move away from a heavy environmental focus andconsider more strongly the social landscape and its influence on behavior. Spatialallocation, the assignment of territories to sites, has had a long history in archaeol-ogy, and GIS certainly facilitates these approaches in all their diverse forms (e.g.,Thiessen polygons, circular catchments). GIS also allows more realistic results byconsidering the cost or difficulty of movement over a landscape, or by weightingterritory size by the perceived influence of a center, for example. A new domain ofinquiry made possible by GIS lies in intervisibility and viewshed studies (the latterrefers to all places visible from a point or points on a landscape). This capability al-lows examination of territoriality through estimated visible areas, of defensibility,and of visual dominance and has opened a pathway toward past cognition throughthe realization that sites or settlements might be placed so that certain places arevisible.The final analytical section of simulation broaches a topic appropriate forthe generation of insights into any archaeological domain. Through GIS, archae-ologists have simulated subjects as diverse as lithic scatter formation to likelypathways for the peopling of the New World. Moreover, realistic landscapes maynow be employed in place of the featureless plain assumption of earlier regionalsimulations. Importantly, these studies typically are multitemporal and illustrate adynamic capability that adds rich new perspectives to the study of the past.156KvammeI close this essay with two concluding sections. The first examines the manycritiques of GIS by postmodernists, the principal one being that GIS fosters anenvironmental determinism stemming from its reliance on traditional forms ofmapped data. Finally, I look at future directions the technology will certainly takeand speculate on the possibilities that will exist in an information-rich world witharchaeological and other GIS databases on-line, linked, and available through theInternet. This review therefore takes us on a journey along many different pathways,each facilitated or made possible by GIS. The state of the art of research in eachdomain is examined and examples from the now prolific literature in many of theseareas are reviewed. The end result is a comprehensive summary of GIS in archae-ology as it exists today that illustrates its usefulness, versatility, and limitations.Defining GIS and Its CapabilitiesThe definition of GIS has proven to be an elusive task (see Fisher andLindenberg, 1989). Early attempts focused on requisite software elements. Marble(1984), for example, demands four components including (1) a data input system,(2) a system for information storage and retrieval, (3) an analysis, manipulation,data generation, and modeling engine, and (4) a display and reporting capability.More recent characterizations emphasize the problem-solving qualities of GIS,as in: "a decision support system involving the integration of spatially referenceddata in a problem solving environment" (Cowen, 1988, p. 155).A GIS database has a defined region as its focus. Individual map themes, orvariables, represent distinct "layers" of information within the database region.The map layers are spatially coregistered to a particular coordinate base (e.g.,UTM, longitude-latitude) insuring that any locus in one coincides with the sameplace in the others. Data layers may be derived from digitized or scanned papermaps, aerial photographs, or satellite imagery, for example; and textual or otherinformation (e.g., artifact locations) may be keyed in manually or obtained fromextant computer databases, provided they are associated with spatial coordinates(most GIS allow translation between various coordinate systems). The primaryinformation one feeds a GIS may be encoded through an in-house operation orpurchased through government or commercial sources.The processing power of the computer together with the typical softwareflexibility of most GIS programs allows a great diversity of secondary layers tobe derived analytically from the primary data. Digital elevation contours allowestimation of an altitude surface interpolated systematically across the databaseregion; these elevation data might be employed to determine all locations visiblefrom a point or points; and a distance-to-water layer might be generated fromdigitized lake, river, and stream locations, for example. More complex and variedoperations are illustrated below.Recent Directions in GIS157Map features are traditionally displayed through use of three cartographicdevices: points, lines, and areas. Point features include a mountain summit, a sur-veyor's datum, or the locus of a town on a small scale map. Lines are employedto represent rivers, roads, or perhaps elevation contours. The area data type refersto regions of homogeneity such as lakes, forests, or property parcels. A varietyof symbol types, colors, or point or line styles might be used to distinguish be-tween them. Vector GIS possesses data structures and display formats that are mostallied to these fundamental cartographic types. Point, line, and area features arelocated by spatial coordinates, referred to as topology. This information is distinctfrom attributes, which describe particular characteristics of the features. An ar-chaeological site, for example, is bounded by a sequence of spatial coordinates(the topology) that locates its perimeter; linked with it is a series of attributes thatidentifies its number, name, ownership, cultural and temporal affiliation, and othercharacteristics.Grid-based or raster GIS represents a distinctly different approach to spatialdata handling. These systems control two-dimensional matrices of numbers thatrepresent variations in a map theme. Topology is controlled by row and columnposition within the matrix or grid, while an individual value represents an attributecode or measurement at a particular grid cell locus. A layer portraying soil dis-tributions will contain a numeric soil type code as each grid element while anelevation layer will hold individual altitude measurements, for example. Spatialresolution and accuracy is controlled by the area represented by each grid element.Computer storage requirements can be enormous if the database region is large orthe grid cell size is small, but several data compaction algorithms exist that helpto mitigate this factor, especially in spatially redundant layers such as soil classes,where similar attribute codes occur over broad regions.Vector GIS is required whenever precise location is important, such as ina cultural properties management database, or when accurate area or perimeterdata are necessary. Vector GIS is ideal for regional data management applicationsbecause the individual points, lines, or area vectors may be linked with data heldin relational database management software, allowing the instantaneous displayof the results of queries and searches in map form. (This is well illustrated below.)Vector GIS also can produce publication quality maps composed of traditionalpoint, line, and area features.Raster GIS, on the other hand, is spatially less precise owing to its grid cellstructure. Moreover, line and area data suffer from jagged, stair step edges thatgenerally cause inaccurate area and perimeter estimates. Yet, spatial data fromsatellites, scanned aerial photographs, geophysical survey data, or artifact frequen-cies per grid square occur naturally in raster structures and are easily displayedby these systems as continuous tone images (using gray or color values assignedgrid cell by grid cell). In research applications, most archaeologists have foundthe numerical processing and modeling capabilities of raster GIS to be clearly158Kvammeadvantageous, as sections below demonstrate. Whether raster or vector, most GISprograms support some functionality in the other domain; and point, line, or areafeatures can easily be converted from one format to the other.GIS allows an amazing array of operations to be performed on spatial datasets, some of which fall in the following domains.Map redassification generalizes a map from many to fewer categories. Thirty-five soil classes might be reduced to only three, indicating "good," "moderate,"and "poor" soils for maize cultivation, for example.Map overlaying combines categories from multiple map layers. If classes A,B, and C occur in one layer, and a, b, c, and d in another, then an overlay couldproduce the intersection of all possible combinations: Aa, Ab, Ac, Ad, Ba, Bb, Be,Bd, Ca, Cb, Cc, and Cd.Map algebra is a uniquely raster technique that permits algebraic and otheroperations (e.g., addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, exponentiation,square roots, logarithms, means, diversity measures) to be performed within andbetween map layers on a grid cell by grid cell basis. A simple operation mightbe: newlayer = 0.3048*oldlayer, where oldlayer contains an elevation in feet ineach grid unit, "*" signifies multiply, and the result held in newlayer representselevations in meters. A more complex operation might map a regression function ofthe form: newlayer = CO + C1*layerl + C2*layer2 + C3*layer3, where newlayerholds predicted agricultural yields based on soil quality (layer1), slope (layer2),ground moisture (layer3), and CO-C3 are constants (the regression intercept andweights).Boolean operations permit manipulation of binary maps through Booleanlogic. These procedures include unions (the "OR" operation), intersections (the"AND" operation), and negation (the "NOT" operation). If the soils layer indicates"good" versus "poor" soil (coded as 1 and 0, respectively) and the slope layerindicates "level" versus "steep" ground (coded as 1 and 0, respectively), thennewlayer1 = soils OR slope computes the Boolean union where either good soilsor level slopes or both occur, while newlayer2 = soils AND slope maps only thoseplaces where the intersection of good soil with level ground both occur at the sameplace.Distance operations compute distances from a target locus or loci under lin-earity or cost-of-movement assumptions. The latter considers land cover, groundsteepness, elevation changes, and other factors. When combined with map reclas-sification, distance surfaces can produce buffers, catchments, or Thiessen polygonsaround places of interest.Terrain processing allows, through interpolation, the creation of digital terrainmodels (DTM) from point or contoured elevation data. Interrelationships betweenaltitudes then allow estimates of ground steepness (slope), aspect (azimuth), ridgeand drainage lines, watershed boundaries, mesa or canyon rim settings, lines ofsight, regions visible, and much more.Recent Directions in GIS159Image processing routines are specifically designed for the handling of im-agery whether from satellites, aerial or terrestrial photography, or geophysicalsensors and occur within most raster GIS. These programs perform such tasks asdigital image classification, rectification and registration to map coordinate sys-tems, image cropping, edge detection, high and low pass filtering, and brightnessand contrast improvements.Although any one of those domains is useful in and of itself, their real poweris derived in their combination, when several are chained together to achievecomplex results that allow us to do brand new things (Aldenderfer, 1992). A moredetailed examination of these domains is beyond the scope of this presentation,although archaeological demonstrations of them are presented in the followingpages. More information about specific GIS methods may be found in severalintroductory articles written by archaeologists (e.g., Gaffney and Stancic, 1991;Kvamme, 1989, 1992a;Madry, 1990; Peterman, 1992; Wansleeben, 1988; Zubrow,1990a).Data Analysis/Visualization and Scientific ResearchWhen viewing people working with GIS, one soon appreciates how oftenpatterns or relationships are discovered. Merely by displaying maps of archaeo-logical sites with other spatial variables, new associations or tendencies frequentlyare realized. For example, in Snow (1996) diachronic mappings of Iroquoian set-tlements reveal a number of new insights. The essence of this computer graphicsrevolution is its speed, its access to vast amounts of information (recently increasedmanyfold by the World Wide Web), and the complexity of information that can beeasily portrayed. With visualization tools like GIS, archaeologists are encouragedto get more intimately acquainted with their data and to search for patterns. As aconsequence, great changes are underway in the manner in which archaeologistsconduct their research, and the intellectual climate may finally be right for it.Under processual archaeology, "induction" became something of a bad wordas this school became firmly linked with "deductive" reasoning, which was castas beginning with a priori specified theory followed by post hoc testing with data.While correct, this framework represents a somewhat narrow view of scientificresearch. To put this in perspective we need to ask ourselves: "What is the sourceof our theoretical ideas?" Most of us realize that scientific research moves backand forth between theory and data in a repetitive and interactive cycle. Ideas areobtained from somewhere; we then compare them to the world to find out if theyare correct. We might obtain only partial confirmation and need to modify ourideas in the face of reality, which initiates a new cycle of testing with data andtheorizing. This cycle, of course, may be entered anywhere. We might begin withan a priori theory, like central place theory, or alternatively, enter the cycle in the160Kvammemiddle by exploring discrepancies between data and theory generated by others.Whatever the case, the heavy archaeological focus on a priori theory and the scornfrequently held for more data-grounded ideas is incorrect and limiting. Althoughempirical generalizations might misrepresent some causal relationships, they canbe a tremendous source of insight. Bamforth (1994) notes the worth of theseinsights "for those of us who are interested in seeing the world as it is rather thanas we want it to be" (emphasis original).Medical research provides excellent examples. Almost weekly the press re-ports on new medical discoveries that are not generally theoretical, but empirical,based on statistical patterns in data. Some of them are well known and currentlypopular: that aspirin or even red wine reduce the risk of heart disease, for example.Earlier statistical discoveries that have had a far reaching impact on society estab-lished the linkage between an exposure to radiation and various cancers, smokingand lung cancer, and fatty foods with coronary disease. These findings did notcome about through a priori theorizing, but through diligent empirical research bya host of institutions on independent and carefully controlled samples. In each casethis work ultimately demonstrated that causal relationships must exist, althoughinitially few or no theoretical mechanisms were understood that might explainthese relationships. Theory comes later and usually through hard work. In thesecontexts it is enough that important relationships discovered through statisticalpatterns are shown to really exist. It is discoveries such as these that set scientistson the road toward theoretical models that explain underlying causal processesthrough the scientific cycle of observation, theorizing, testing, modifying theory,testing again, and so on. Even now, some 50 years after Hiroshima, we barelyunderstand at a theoretical level why high doses of radiation induce cancers, butwe have made considerable progress.Computer visualization tools like GIS provide an incredibly powerful mech-anism for identifying patterns. Although maps were originally tied to landscapes,now anything that possesses spatial coordinates may be mapped, and at any scalefrom atomic surfaces to intergalactic spaces. The first Landsat images from spacerevealed the remarkable structure of the earth's crust, while the first images of theocean floor from Seasat's radar altimeter fully revealed the nature of mid-oceanridges and the structure of the continental plates, both of which radically alteredtheories and ideas about our planet (Hall, 1992, pp. 52-87). In an even larger realm,recent mappings of the cosmos aided by computer visualization tools have revealedamazing structures consisting of galactic filaments, clusters, and voids that weretotally unexpected and have caused large revisions in theory, even challenging theBig Bang (Geller, 1988; de Lapparent et al., 1986).In the following pages I demonstrate that similar new discoveries of im-portance are occurring in archaeology, largely through GIS-based visualization.Yet, while the benefits of data visualization are clear, there are potential dangers.One complaint, too often justified in archaeology, is that GIS merely makes "prettyRecent Directions in GIS161pictures" or that there is little substance behind the stunning visual products (Lock,1995; Madsen, 1996). Another is that GIS graphic results are portrayed as "spatialanalyses" while not long ago a formal statistical analysis was required to presentconclusions. Additionally, we must recognize that the human eye can be easilyfooled. It might perceive patterns in an image that do not really exist or fail torecognize trends that do. For this reason a host of recent papers have called for adual approach that links GIS visualization with quantitative analysis (Harris andLock, 1995; Kvamme, 1994; Lock, 1995; Lock and Harris, 1992). Quantitativemeasures of the strengths of patterns are desirable as a basis for comparison withother results or samples, for example. Moreover, statistical methods can informus of the existence of tendencies or relationships that are difficult or even impos-sible to visualize. Statistical tests could play a confirmatory role in documenting"visually apparent" results. At the same time, visualization tools remain essentialbecause simple quantitative measures cannot convey the nature of spatial patternsin the same way that an effective graphic can.GIS AND DATABASE MANAGEMENTGIS-driven archaeological databases are of great benefit to researchers andcultural resource managers alike. Yet, in my view they can become an end inthemselves and do not well illustrate the exciting potential or power of GIS inthe analytical domain. (Although ultimately they may be essential to analysisas principal data sources.) Nevertheless, the chief applications area of GIS inarchaeology will undoubtedly lie in database development and management; it isalready happening.Regional DatabasesAs early as 1992, the volume Sites and Monuments: National ArchaeologicalRecords (Larsen, 1992) described a host of mostly European national databasemanagement efforts that employed GIS or GIS-like (computer cartography) tools.Similar reports now occur frequently throughout the GIS literature for a host ofcountries and regions around the globe (e.g., Aberg and Leech, 1992; Arroyo-Bishop and Zarzosa, 1992; Bampton and Hamilton, 1996; Boaz and Uleberg,1993; Bosqued et al., 1996; Canouts, 1992; Chartrand et al., 1993; Farley et al.,1990; Guillot, 1992; Guillot and Leroy, 1995; Harris and Lock, 1992; Lang, 1993;Massagrande, 1995; Middleton and Winstanley, 1993; Mikkelsen and Larsen,1992; Murray, 1995; Palumbo, 1993; Robinson, 1993;Roorda and Wiemer, 1992a;Stancic and Gaffney, 1996). Overviews of the historical development of informa-tion technology for cultural resource databases, from a GIS perspective, are given162Kvammeby Madsen (1996), Hansen (1993), and Harris and Lock (1990, 1995). Wheatley(1995a) offers an introductory presentation of the technology, describing what itcan do for cultural resource managers.The GIS-linked database is a natural evolution from current aspatial databases.The latter, in the form of relational database management systems (RDBMS), areessential to any data management effort. Through them, data in multiple filesmay be joined, and searches, sorting, or subsetting queries may be made usingStructured Query Language (SQL). When linked with GIS, however, their utilityand impact is greatly expanded because cartographic elements may be associatedand displayed simultaneously with database text. In addition to a map of selectedsites, the GIS can illustrate other cartographic features of a region such as river andstream courses, elevation contours, or roads (see Csaki et al., 1995; van Leusen,1993; Wansleeban and Verhart, 1995).The GIS-RDBMS link is not a one way street. Database selections may bemade graphically, through the GIS. Roorda and Wiemer (1992a,b), for example,describe the Netherland's ARCHIS database, where the user can point to a sitein a graphic display resulting in textual information about it from the RDBMS.Alternatively, the user might drag a rectangle across the display or use the GISto generate a 1 km buffer surrounding roads; in either case all sites within thechosen region are selected in the RDBMS and their data are shown. Farley et al.(1990) illustrate an additional improvement to the GIS-RDBMS relationship bydemonstrating how Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) software can enhance inter-pretation through concurrent displays of maps, database text, and a rich variety ofcharts, graphs, and statistics.The many issues in GIS database development are too numerous to fully ex-amine here. Miller (1995) is concerned with the general fuzziness of archaeologicaldata and how imprecisely located features should be represented by systems thatrequire exact coordinates. Harris and Lock (1992) call for "symbolic" rather than"cartographic" representations at the regional level. They argue that within-sitefeatures (find spots, excavated materials) more appropriately belong in intrasiteGIS databases (see below), not in regional ones where sites are best representedas single polygonal entities. Quite the opposite perspective is offered by Andresenand Madsen (1992) and Arroyo-Bishop and Zarzosa (1992, 1995) who focus ondatabases appropriate at all possible scales using object-oriented approaches.Most of the real problems in GIS database development are sociopoliticalrather than technical. Madsen (1996) describes the situation in Scandinavia whereheavily financed rescue archaeology has access to GIS but is devoid of researchambitions, a situation in marked contrast with academic archaeology, which coulduse GIS for research but can hardly afford it. Harris and Lock (1992) emphasizethe high cost of GIS, the shortage of trained personnel, and political difficultiesin the United Kingdom stemming from heavy investment in pre-GIS technologythat makes yet another change in computer systems unattractive. Hansen (1993)Recent Directions in GIS163discusses conceptual, data format, and linguistic barriers to pan-European data-bases, but points to graphic and museum standards that already exist and the useof common icons to get around language difficulties.Despite these problems the benefits of GIS-driven regional databases are clear(see Farley and Gisiger, 1996; Harris and Lock, 1990, 1992, 1995; Limp, 1992;Wheatley, 1995a). They potentially allow integration of text and numeric data inRDBMS with maps, drawings, photographs, and environmental data, making easyaccess to diverse information sources possible for the first time. Moreover, themany analytical and modeling tools available in GIS provide a rich environmentfor addressing research questions, on topics that are amplified in the followingsections. In management contexts, search and query capabilities facilitate routineenquiries and reduce administrative loads. Furthermore, planners at higher levelsof government can have access to archaeological data, allowing it to be includedmore easily in environmental impact and other decisions (Harris and Lock, 1992).Finally, automated databases can facilitate the trend for greater public access tostate-sponsored data sets, although potential abuse by artifact hunters warrantsprotection of sensitive locational information. In any case, with the Internet andWorld Wide Web, where large data sets may be made available to global audiences,these issues are now of immediate concern. This globalization of information isreferred to by Farley and Gisiger (1996) as "corporate metadata." Forecastingtrends to come, Limp and Gisiger (1992) provide concrete examples of continent-wide mappings of archaeological distributions that illustrate tremendous potentialbenefits to archaeology.Although the original focus of GIS-driven archaeological databases was atthe regional level, largely stemming from the need for state or regionwide ar-chaeological databases in cultural resource management contexts, in recent years,attention in archaeological GIS has shifted toward the individual site, particularlyin research contexts. After all, extensive work in the form of survey, mapping,remote sensing, and excavation is often conducted at individual sites requiringsome form of computerized data management to handle these typically large anddiverse spatial data sets.Within-Site Applications of GISIn reviewing the literature on within-site GIS, one soon realizes that it fre-quently is employed as little more than a two-dimensional (2D) cartographicpresentation tool. Vector outlines showing the locations of walls, pits, middens,ditches, post holes, and the like, are color coded by feature type, cultural affiliation,or temporal period, and various artifact distributions are similarly portrayed. Sanzet al. (1995), for example, examine complex overlapping polygons representingsome 350 graves at the Iberian Iron Age cemetery of El Cigarralejo. Sorting and164Kvammedisplaying these features by time, sex, wealth, and the richness of grave goodshelped them to understand the organization and fundamental characteristics ofburial practices. Using similar methods, Snow (1994) examines the structure ofIroquoian site features revealed by thousands of post holes in New York, Pottset al. (1996) visualize relationships between artifacts and fossil bones at Olorge-sailie, and Biro and Fejes (1995) plot artifact and feature locations by 5 cm level tobetter understand a lithic workshop in Hungary. Although these applications aid insite interpretation, they are almost indistinguishable from CAD-based mappingsof within-site elements (e.g., compare the CAD drawings of Beex, 1995; Kotsakiset al., 1995). Indeed, this close similarity has prompted Lock (1993, p. 1) to warnthat "GIS research will stagnate at the level of drawing maps."GIS offers a number of distinct advantages over CAD in within-site applica-tions, however. The linkage with RDBMS, so useful at the regional level, allowssimilar SQL queries and searches within a local database by artifact or feature type,period, cultural association, or other elements of interest. Chartrand et al. (1993)and Miller (1995, 1996) explore some of these capabilities and related issues intheir focus on the complex urban archaeological setting of York. Arroyo-Bishopand Zarzosa (1992, 1995; see also Arroyo-Bishop, 1991, 1992), however, refuse tomake a distinction between within-site and regional levels in their ArcheoDATAprogram. This object-oriented system is virtually boundary free and permits ar-chaeological features, artifacts, ecofacts, and architecture to be linked into "in-terpretive entities" at virtually any scale, from a single house feature to a villagecluster or large regional areas.Certain GIS functions and capabilities offer a number of advantages in within-site contexts. Biro and Fejes (1995), for example, laud the GIS ability to reclassifyvectors representing individual site features into useful groups like "houses" or"pits." The flexibility of GIS in incorporating ancillary data like aerial photographsis appreciated by Romano and Tolba (1995) in their work at Corinth, while digitizedterrestrial photographs of rock art have greatly augmented the forms of analysisundertaken by Preysler and Blasco (1996) in Colombia. Indeed, terrestrial pho-tography handled within GIS has opened up new possibilities through the useof photogrammetric methods that allow detailed measurements to be performed,permitting exacting documentation that ultimately facilitates the reconstruction ofcastle walls, for example (Oswald, 1996). More subjectively, but of no less impor-tance, high resolution DTM has allowed visualization of sites in their immediatelandscape contexts, allowing better understanding of setting, access, defense, andother issues (Biro and Fejes, 1995; Csaki et al., 1995; Forte, 1995; Miller, 1996;Romano and Tolba, 1995).Raster GIS offers display options not available in vector-based CAD systems.It is particularly well suited for gridded excavation data such as artifact counts.Fishnet or pseudo-3D views are typically employed to illustrate artifact, stone, orbone density gradients across a site, and standard 2D rasters are effective in the sameRecent Directions in GIS165way when densities are color coded or gray scaled (Hinshelwood and Dalla Bona,1994; Meffert, 1995; Wansleeben and Verhart, 1995). Even more flexibility occurswhen a raster display is employed as a backdrop over which vectors of importantsite features are draped. In such a way discrete entities as house walls, hearths,or storage pits may be displayed simultaneously over a continuous phenomenonsuch as artifact densities (Biswell et al., 1995; Groenewoudt and Wiemer, 1993).Beyond mere display, a number of GIS analytic tools have been explored inwithin-site contexts. Map algebra methods allow transformation of artifact countsper grid into ratios between types or proportions that, when mapped, yield verydifferent views and new insights (Ebert et al., 1996; Kvamme, 1996a). GIS-basedinterpolation and smoothing methods have been employed to estimate a continu-ous artifact density surface from artifact counts retrieved through systematicallyplaced auger holes that punched through 120 cm of overburden in the Netherlands(Wiemer, 1995). In a somewhat unusual application, Doody et al. (1995) obtained6,700 altitude measurements, randomly placed along the steep, rugged, and heavilyvegetated slopes of the 1.5 ha Castle Gale hillfort in Limerick, Ireland. Althoughfew surface features were visible, through creation of a DTM interpolated fromthese data, vertical exaggeration, and analytical hill shading (a technique that illu-minates a surface in order to cast shadows), they were able to show in great detailthe nature of inner and outer ramparts, entranceways, and a large cairn featurefrom the shape of the microtopography alone.In landscape archaeology contexts that focus not on the site but on the distribu-tions of individual artifacts and features across broad regions (Dunnel and Dancey,1983), GIS has proven useful as a means to examine and analyze patterns in thedata, particularly in arid regions. To illustrate, ground stone and other distributionsare examined by Biskowski (1994) at Otumba, an Aztec city in central Mexico,while length/width ratios and other indicators of lithic technology are analyzed byEbert et al. (1996) across an 800 x 800 m space of southern New Mexico. Sim-ilarly, Kvamme (1996a) focuses particularly on spatial sorting patterns exhibitedby 25,000 pieces of debitage in a 0.6 ha area of Colorado; and in New South Wales,Australia, Holdaway (1996) seeks associations between eroding and accumulat-ing sediments and the distribution of 24,000 artifacts. Groenewoudt and Wiemer(1993) planned to use their substantial results from GIS mappings of surface findsfrom plowed fields to guide excavations at the Roman fort of Valkenburg in theNetherlands, but funding delays caused their analyses to be available only afterexcavations were complete.Despite calls to the contrary (e.g., Harris and Lock, 1995; Kvamme, 1994;Lock, 1995), there has been little linkage of GIS with formal intrasite statisticaltesting (see, however, Groenewoudt and Wiemer, 1993; Kvamme, 1993, 1996a).One reason is the general lack of statistical analysis software in many GIS and thetime-consuming difficulties of exporting GIS data to statistical software packages.Recognizing this deficiency, Reynoso and Castro (1994) created a program called166Kvamme"VB-GIS" that is specifically designed for data visualization simultaneous withquantitative spatial analysis.Three-dimensional GIS (Raper, 1989) promises great potential for excavatedarchaeological sites. These relatively new systems should not be confused withsuch common GIS practices as the vertical stacking of multiple 2D coverages or a2D layer like stream courses draped over an orthographic view of landform. True3D GIS associates attributes with independent x, y, and z axes (unlike other typesof GIS that ignore the third dimension), allowing deposits, features, and artifactsto be visualized in their proper 3D contexts. A volume may be rotated, sliced,diced, or "exploded" to yield virtually any possible view of internal relationships(Harris and Lock, 1996). Although not widely available and currently expensive(present applications are principally confined to geological mineral, oil, and gasexploration), these systems allow better understanding of complex deposits andgreatly aid in the interpretation of intrasite spatial relationships, site structure, andformation processes.In recent years, with great strides in better sensor systems and in the digi-tal logging of field information, geophysical prospection methods have come tooccupy an increasingly important role in initial archaeological site investigationsbecause they can reveal much about subsurface features and structure. This isparticularly true in regions like northern Europe where geophysical surveys areconducted as a matter of course and often as a first step in the site evaluationprocess (David, 1995). It is not surprising, then, that GIS increasingly plays a rolein the manipulation and incorporation of these spatial data sets into within-sitedatabases.Remote Sensing and GISMost geophysical prospection data sets (e.g., magnetometry, resistivity, con-ductivity) are gathered systematically across an area (with readings taken everyhalf meter, for example), yielding a natural raster data structure readily compati-ble with GIS. Modern instrumentation, with its high data capture rates and fielddata loggers, allows rapid coverage of large areas, frequently yielding many tensof thousands of measurements. The special characteristics of these data requiresophisticated processing software (Scollar et al., 1990), and their volume requiresspecialized data handling procedures, both of which are made possible by GIS.GIS can be employed to coregister diverse geophysical data sets with eachother or with aerial photographs, site plans, artifact distribution maps, or topo-graphic maps (Carr and Turner, 1996; Ladefoged et al., 1995; Newman, 1993;Richards, 1996). Most GIS applications contain a suite of image processing andrendering tools that allow the assignment of color or gray scales to geophysicalrasters, permitting these data to be treated as continuous-tone imagery. Such aRecent Directions in GIS167tactic often reveals subtle patterns impossible to see using traditional contouringmethods. Procedures developed in air photo interpretation may then be employedwhere patterned geometries like squares, rectangles, circles, or ellipses suggestfeatures of cultural origin (Scollar et al., 1990). Additionally, image processingand enhancement routines can clip or remove outlying data spikes (a frequent oc-currence in these data), balance image brightness, improve contrast, remove noise,or highlight possible boundaries or "edges" through various filters (Ladefogedet al., 1995; Music, 1995). In one example the use of analytical shading applied toa magnetic surface yielded shadows that emphasized subtle detail, including indi-cations of possible house structures, at Navan Fort in Northern Ireland (Kvamme,1996b). Similarly, Ladefoged et al. (1995) utilized GIS-based data filtering, colorcompositing, and image classification methods to highlight significant features inprospection data sets in New Zealand. At a more basic and useful level, Jones(1996) describes how on-screen digitizing of a displayed magnetic surface assistsin the definition of significant anomalies.At the regional level, remotely sensed satellite data have generally provenuseful to archaeology. With spatial resolutions in the usual range of 20-80 m (andtypically about 30 m), these data have been of little use for intrasite archaeologicalstudy. In regional studies, however, satellite data have proven to be extremely im-portant, especially in areas where no base maps are available and for the purpose ofdetermining land cover types, geology, and ecological zones. In general, GIS hasbeen shown to be an efficient tool for the management, handling, and processing ofthese data (Gaffney et al., 1996; Johnson, 1996; Johnson et al., 1988; Madry andCrumley, 1990; Romano and Tolba, 1995). GIS permits remotely sensed imageryto be rectified and registered to a region's spatial coordinate base, thereby allowingits simultaneous use with other encoded map layers. The image processing toolsallow improvements in image quality, color display and compositing, and mostimportantly image classification. The last converts the digital brightness valuesrepresented by each wave length band into likely land cover types (e.g., forest, wa-ter, pavement, wheat field) through mathematical or probabilistic means. [Theirdescription is beyond this paper's scope; further details may be found in Limp(1989).] These classified or interpreted maps from space ultimately form the back-ground data central to many regional projects and databases (e.g., Gaffney et al.,1996; Johnson, 1996; Madry and Crumley, 1990).THE ANALYTICAL CAPABILITIES OF GISThe diverse forms of analysis promoted by GIS have allowed entirely newresearch questions to be addressed. This diversity may neatly be grouped intoseveral domains, each of which approaches problems of a regional nature from adifferent perspective.168KvammeLocational Analysis at the Regional LevelThe spatial analysis of regional archaeological distributions originally cen-tered around the analysis of point-patterns using, for example, variance/mean ra-tios, Poisson distributions, nearest-neighbor analyses, or trend surfaces (Hodderand Orton, 1976). These approaches focused on various geometries between thepoints of interest (usually archaeological sites) and are frequently implemented inGIS. Since the early 1970s, considerable work has also been done in associatingsettlement distributions with features of environment (e.g., Plog and Hill, 1971;Thomas and Bettinger, 1976). These kinds of analyses have received great atten-tion in archaeological GIS applications in part because environmental variables areeasily quantified by GIS. Analyses generally fall into two groups: those that focuson environmental properties at the sites themselves, and those that examine condi-tions within catchment areas (usually of 1-5 km radius) surrounding sites. In bothcases the question is the same and probably represents one of the most commonones asked in regional studies: Are there environmental conditions at archaeo-logical sites or in their neighborhoods that might have influenced their placementby past peoples (cf. Plog and Hill, 1971; Thomas and Bettinger, 1976; Vita-Finziand Higgs, 1970)? GIS has made possible a number of interesting methodologicaladvances in these analyses.The first application of a significance test for archaeological location tenden-cies utilized the chi-square goodness-of-fit test long before the advent of GIS (Plogand Hill, 1971; see Shennan, 1988 for a more current summary). This test forces acomparison of archaeological distributions against a background norm, such as anentire region's environmental distribution. For example, that 70 percent of settle-ments in a region lie on south-facing slopes is not significant if 70 percent of theentire region faces south. On the other hand, if only 20 percent of the backgroundenvironment is south facing, a significant pattern is most likely indicated. GIS easilydetermines areas of background classes and site distribution statistics, making thistest easy to implement; and its use in GIS remains common (Altschul, 1990;Gaffney and Stancic, 1991; van Leusen, 1996; Williams et al., 1990). Although itis an ideal test for such nominal-level map variables as soils, geologic, or vegeta-tion cover types, continuous phenomena like elevations, slopes, and distances towater must first be categorized. This amounts to the throwing away of informationbecause the scale of measurement is reduced, which can lead to less powerfulinferences, and the examination of mean tendencies or locational variability isprecluded.An alternative tactic is to characterize the background environment through arandom sample of control points at which measurements of a continuous variablemay be made. This body of measurements constitutes a sample approximationof the region that is then compared against measurements obtained at a sampleof archaeological site locations using two-sample t, Mann-Whitney, or SmirnovRecent Directions in GIS169tests (Carmichael, 1990; Kvamme and Jochim, 1989; Wheatley, 1996). Yet thesetests, like the previous, merely imitate what was being done manually without GIS(e.g., see Shermer and Tiffany, 1985) and do not make use of any of its specialcapabilities or simple computational power.It was soon realized that in raster GIS an entire region, or spatial population,can be represented numerically. Consequently, the region no longer needs to beapproximated by a sample; actual population parameters or the entire cumulativepopulation distribution can be determined, simply through consideration of all thegrid cells in the region. As a result, movement to one-sample testing strategiescould be made where the unusualness of an archaeological sample is evaluatedwith respect to the population (Kvamme, 1990a, 1992b; McClung de Tapia andTapia-Recillas, 1996; Wheatley, 1995b). This is an inference strategy only rarelyattempted prior to GIS owing to the large computational burden. [See Hodder andOrton (1976, p. 225) for a crude manual approximation.]Recently, randomization tests based on Monte Carlo methods have been ad-vocated because they are relatively easy to implement in raster GIS (Kvamme,1996c). Using some index of interest (e.g., a sample mean or variance), analystscan assess the unusualness of the value obtained from an archaeological sample bycomparing it against a sampling distribution of index values obtained from 99, oreven 999, simple random samples of the same size from the region. If the archae-ological sample statistic lies in the upper or lower 5-10 percent of values, then asample with significantly different tendencies can be claimed. This approach offersfreedom from the limiting assumptions of some statistical tests (e.g., normality)and in contexts where it might be computationally difficult to determine populationparameters [e.g., only 99 viewshed areas (see below) might be determined in placeof all possible viewshed areas].Archaeological applications of GIS-based locational analysis are many anddiverse. Allen (1996), for example, focuses on Iroquoian locational preferenceswith respect to climate variables across the state of New York. In an unusualdiachronic study in the same state, Hasenstab (1996) looks at settlement prefer-ence through time as a vehicle for explaining historic Iroquoian culture changes.In Finland, Kirkinen (1996) examines the environmental correlates of nonagrar-ian Iron Age settlements while Vikkula (1994) investigates landscape changesin glacial and other features and their effects on Stone Age site distributions.GIS analyses of settlement in more complex societies also have been conducted.McClung de Tapia and Tapia-Recillas (1996) explore the Teotihuacan region ofMexico and show no major differences between Middle-Terminal Formative pe-riod sites in elevation, slope, aspect, or soil depth preferences. Likewise, Kunaand Adelsbergerova (1995) focus on differences between settlement distributionsof the Final Bronze Age and the Roman period in Bohemia, which are ana-lyzed with respect to six relief categories. Historic sites at Fort Hood, Texas,are examined by Williams et al. (1990) who combine GIS with relational data-bases and sophisticated EDA plots in a multifaceted exploration of site locationfactors.170KvammeWhile the foregoing approaches have concentrated almost exclusively on theanalysis of environmental properties at the loci of the archaeological sites them-selves, the domain of catchment-based studies should not be overlooked becauseGIS has played a large role in these studies as well. Most catchment approachesapply the circular form established by Vita-Finzi and Higgs (1970). GIS can adda great deal of flexibility to the form of catchment definition (a topic examined inmore detail in a later section on territoriality), and it facilitates the computation ofareas of soil, geologic, physiographic, or environmental types within catchmentsthat are usually the basis of analysis. Hunt (1992), for example, argues that GISdoes not simply mimic earlier manual approaches, but that it facilitates compu-tation of complex soil productivity indices within the catchments that would bedifficult to derive manually. He goes on to show changes in the area within catch-ments of optimum soils for maize production that parallel known historical andprotohistorical circumstances in a diachronic study of Iroquoian settlement in NewYork. Baena et al. (1995) employ a similar approach to examine the relationshipbetween the first metal-working groups (Bell Beaker) of the Madrid region withrespect to soils and necessary mineral resources.If locational analysis methods can give insights into the kinds of variablesthat influenced, or that are at least correlated with, the kinds of places wherepast peoples placed their settlements, sites, or activities, then the consideration ofthese variables in combination can provide a means to suggest or predict whereundiscovered archaeological sites might be locatedŠan approach that now formsan important domain of cultural resource management and planning.Predictive Models of Archaeological LocationThe various forms of locational analysis of archaeological sites with respectto individual environmental variables can produce great insights into the kinds ofphenomena that are related to their placement. Models of archaeological locationgo a step further by merging what is known through locational analysis multidi-mensionally. In one sense such models are descriptive statements that summarizethe multivariate environmental and spatial pattern of archaeological sites; in an-other they form predictive statements because a good model can indicate likelylocations of as yet undiscovered sites.Regional models of archaeological site distributions represent one of theearliest major application areas of GIS in archaeology. They are a uniquely GISendeavor owing to their vast data and computational requirements. Without GIS,high resolution models of archaeological resource locations could not be obtainedover large areas, although the early history of modeling predates GIS. [See Kohlerand Parker (1986) for an overview of early approaches.]The impetus behind the development of these models stemmed largely fromgovernment agencies in the United States, particularly in the western region wherehuge tracts of government lands exist. In the early 1980s sample surveys wereRecent Directions in GIS171being conducted to inventory those lands. Several agencies began to ask for ameans to utilize locational patterns exhibited by discovered archaeological sitesto suggest or "predict" where future sites might be found for management andplanning purposes [see Judge and Sebastian (1988) for relevant overviews.]Two fundamentally different approaches to archaeological predictive model-ing were developed. Both are based on the premise that human locational behavioris patterned and that part of that pattern covaries with environmental circum-stances (a premise that can be tested statistically through the locational analysismethods of the previous section). The principal methodology examines samplesof known archaeological sites in a region, hopefully obtained through some sortof random sampling program, for statistical associations with various mappableenvironmental conditions such as slope, elevation, aspect, soil type, or distanceto water. Typically, multivariate discriminant or logistic regression functions areemployed to develop probability equations that contrast environmental differencesbetween an archaeological site sample and a sample of random points known notto contain archaeological sites. One can then go to a map at any point and, based onmeasurements of relevant environmental variables, use the multivariate functionto make a decision about the likelihood, or even the probability, of archaeologicalsite presence. Great rigor in model development is possible through use of randomsampling designs, and they may be thoroughly tested simply through the expe-dient of comparing predictions with actual archaeological circumstances learnedthrough independent sample surveys. See Carr (1985), Kvamme (1990b), Parker(1985), van Leusen (1996), and Warren (1990a) for the many additional detailsrelevant to this approach.Early pre-GIS efforts attempted to manually apply such models over smallregions, but hand measurement of a large number of environmental variables at nu-merous locations was a tedious and error-prone process. The need for automationwas clear. Early projects developed computer programsŠessentially GISŠto ac-complish this, which yielded systematic model decisions every 50 m across regionsranging in size from a few hundred to over 1,000 km2 (Hasenstab, 1983; Kvamme,1984). With commercial GIS readily available by the late 1980s, numerous exam-ples soon followed. Carmichael (1990), for example, illustrates robust models oflithic scatter sites in Montana, despite use of low quality DTM; and Hasenstab andResnick (1990) describe an application to historical sites at Fort Drum, New York.Maschner and Stein (1995) show how a series of categorical variables can be em-ployed to model site locations in coastal Alaska. They also demonstrate that greatinsights into locational determinants may be learned from empirical data throughlog-linear analyses. Rigorous model testing, essential before confidence may beplaced in any model, is emphasized by Kvamme (1992c), who utilizes independentsample surveys to test locational models for Great Plains hunter-gatherers. Sitesthat are not well predicted owing to their nonconformance with trends exhibitedby other sites receive special attention from Altschul (1990), who touts "red flag"172Kvammemodels that serve to indicate them in a rather crude modeling effort in Arizona.Warren (1990b) does much the same by utilizing a more sophisticated analysis ofresiduals in a southern Illinois settlement model.These methods soon spread to Europe where they received particular attentionin the Netherlands (van Leusen, 1996). In that country Brandt et al. (1992) offermodels of surprising power for Stone Age through Medieval sites (suggestingunderlying commonalities in settlement location choice), and van Leusen (1993)confronts an unusual difficulty in being forced to first reconstruct ancient drainagepatterns before modeling the settlement system. Despite utilizing heavily biasedfind spot data along the Danube of southern Germany, Kvamme and Jochim (1989)nevertheless model locational patterns that stem, in part, from choices made bythe Mesolithic inhabitants.Surprisingly, there was an early negative reaction to the foregoing modelingapproaches by some processual archaeologists who advocated a more "deduc-tively" derived, explanatory approach to modeling past locational behaviors (seeEbert, 1988; Kohler and Parker, 1986; Sebastian and Judge, 1988). These criticsseemed not to realize that the variables selected in the empirical modeling approachalso stem from a priori theory, and that statistical methods merely offer a means forobtaining robust weights for the variables selected because they are derived fromthe actual data. Indeed, the relative weighting of variables, often based on littlemore than conjecture, is the greatest weakness of an a priori deductive modelingapproach. (For example, why should good soils get a weight of "5" while proxim-ity to water receives a weight of only "3" in the model decision rules?) Because oftheir low power when tested against real data, few useful modeling applicationshave derived from a deductively oriented perspective, largely owing to our poorknowledge of how past (or even present) settlement systems work and our inabilityto derive the "law-like" statements that form the basis of this modeling approach(see Kohler and Parker, 1986, for a hypothetical example application).Dalla Bona (1993) and Dalla Bona and Larcombe (1996) have probably comethe closest in a GIS context by intensively examining ethnographic and ethnohis-toric accounts pertaining to native settlement in northwest Ontario. This alloweddevelopment of conceptual models of seasonal land use that were then implementedin GIS through a map algebra approach that weighted and combined relevant envi-ronmental layers, but only after closely "tweaking" decision parameters (i.e., theweights for each variable) by iteratively matching model results with empiricalsite distributions!Ironically, one of the best a priori deductive models lies in an early study byChadwick (1978,1979) that possessed GIS-like capabilities. Utilizing a raster datastructure and numerous environmental data layers, Chadwick modeled the LateHelladic Mycenaean settlement system entirely on the basis of premises aboutenvironmental preferences and population distribution influences of the previousMiddle Helladic period. Recently, in a paper that suggests great promise, KohlerRecent Directions in GIS173and Gumerman (1996) place loose automata ("agents" representing households)onto GIS paleoproductivity surfaces in the American Southwest and observe theirlocational solutions to making a living in that landscape using very simple decisionrules.A well-tested archaeological location model can offer an important planningmechanism for cultural resource managers. Greater monitoring, surveillance, andprotection can be afforded to regions that are predicted to have high archaeolog-ical potential. Land-disturbing activities can be planned around highly sensitiveareas and directed to regions with a lesser likelihood of cultural resources. Inso doing, the costs for initial survey and mitigation of impacts can be reducedbecause fewer sites will be encountered (Parker, 1986). In view of the fact thatcomputer planning models exist for most natural resources and contemporary cul-tural constraints (e.g., real estate value, demographic projections, traffic patterns,endangered species distributions), archaeologists now possess a means, throughGIS, to provide models that allow cultural resources to be factored into environ-mental impact statements and similar planning documents. Indeed, such modelsrecently have been developed and applied on a statewide basis (Hobbs, 1996).Spatial Allocation, Territoriality, and Cost SurfacesPrevious sections have focused largely on environmental properties of archae-ological sites, or in the neighborhoods of settlements, as a means for analyzing andmodeling human locational behavior. There is a considerable social dimension tothe nature and distribution of human settlements across a landscape, however, thatrevolves around such concepts as territoriality, settlement hierarchies, and politicaland economic power. These perspectives have been pursued through GIS as well.Spatial allocation is a general term for methods that attempt to associatesites or places with territories. GIS has yielded exciting potential in this area be-cause it makes traditional approaches like site catchment analysis or Thiessentessellations easy to implement, but mostly because GIS makes possible entirelynew approaches that carry more realistic assumptions about the nature of territoriesand human behavior. GIS unifies ideas about access, movement across landscapes,boundaries, and concepts of territoriality, thereby providing a firmer theoreticalfoundation.Site catchment analysis (SCA) has been around for some time in archaeology(Vita-Finzi and Higgs, 1970). Despite its many theoretical weaknesses, it hasgained new interest in archaeology most probably because simple catchments areso easy to compute through GIS. Under the assumption that nearby places will beof greater economic importance than distant regions, simple circles of fixed radii(e.g., 1-5 km) are placed around loci of interest, usually prehistoric settlements.Economic or other resources are then examined within the catchments to explainsettlement location under the assumption that they are sited to allow easier access174Kvammeto them. This approach is followed by Baena et al. (1995) and Hunt (1992), forexample, for grouping environmental data for analyses of settlement location,as described earlier. In an entirely different application of SCA that focuses onits geometric properties, Lock and Harris (1996, p. 236) contend that the spatialdistribution of 400 m circular catchments in the Danebury Iron Age of Englandsuggests "an infield system under the control of individual settlements," while a1,000 m catchment is shown to coincide with natural landscape features.Like circular catchments, Thiessen polygons are geometrically derived spatialentities; but they differ in that an entire region is partitioned into territories, eachassigned to a site. They are traditionally constructed by drawing a perpendicularat the midpoint of a line that connects two sites; this is performed between eachpair of sites yielding polygonal regions. GIS provides an interesting conceptuallink between Thiessen polygons and site catchments. One can "grow" distancesoutward from a collection of sites. Circular catchments result when the growth isstopped at a fixed distance; if it continues until the entire region is filled, Thiessenpolygons are achieved at the boundaries of the individual growth zones. [See vanLeusen (1993) for an example.]The principal criticism of these spatial allocation methods is that they areconstructed under unrealistic isotropic conditions that do not account for the nat-ural landscape. Van Leusen (1993) notes that characteristics of terrain probablyinfluenced the size and shape of territories; boundaries may have been "attracted"to natural features like rivers and ridge lines, for example. A comprehensive exam-ination of this issue is given by Ruggles and Church (1996) who further considerother shortcomings of the Thiessen tessellation. They point out that the standardapproach assumes equal weight or influence between the points, but that in re-ality settlements vary in size, population, and economic or political influence.They use the flexibility of GIS to explore how alterations of these assumptions,through different weighting schemes, change the Thiessen tessellation for theAztec Temascalapa-Teotihuacan survey regions [see also Stead (1995) for a simi-lar discussion]. While this approach might seem new, Renfrew and Level (1979)actually pioneered it nearly 20 years ago in what they term "XTENT" modeling."Despite these more sensitive approaches to territoriality, the standard isotrop-ically defined Thiessen tesselation remains frequently applied in GIS applications.Savage (1990b), for example, resorts to standard Thiessen polygons despite hisclose investigation of Archaic group interactions with topographic features inGeorgia. Chartrand (1996) compares them between various site types in the Yorkenvirons of England, and Lock and Harris (1996) use them to illustrate a lackof dispersed Neolithic long barrow distribution near Danebury, England, by thenonuniform sizes and shapes of the polygons.Cost surfaces, a GIS concept, move beyond the assumption of a homogeneousand featureless plain that underlies the previous methods. They allow assignmentof weights to individual locations across a landscape according to characteristicsof terrain (e.g., slope), land cover (vegetation types), natural barriers (water bodies,Recent Directions in GIS175cliff faces), and other factors. Costs are accumulated as one moves outward from alocus. With a uniform cost of entry everywhere, a cost surface mimics a simple dis-tance surface. When nonuniform cost-of-entry rules are in place, however, widelydifferent outcomes may be achieved that better reflect environmental influenceson access and movement. This is well illustrated by Limp (1991) in the first majorarchaeological application of this methodology at the Rush site in Arkansas. Ar-guing that as slope increases it becomes significantly more difficult to traverse alocation, Limp employs the square of slope in his cost-of-movement calculationsand allows for riverine barriers. By defining a contour of equal accumulated coston the resulting surface, he defines a highly irregular catchment around the Rushsite that reflects actual landscape properties and can be compared with a tradi-tional circular catchment. Agricultural potential, as reflected by soil conditions, isshown to be markedly different between the two catchment types, illustrating howunrealistic circular catchments can lead to erroneous conclusions.Gaffney and Stancic (1991) apply a similar methodology to several periodsand cultural types on the island of Hvar, in central Dalmatia. Their cost-surface-derived catchments, also a function of slope but field calibrated to walking times,show control of arable lands by Iron Age hillforts, that Bronze Age tumuli were as-sociated with the very best soils, and that Roman settlements were located on goodto very good soils (these analyses are reexamined in Gaffney et al., 1995, 1996).StandiC (1994) and Stancic et al. (1995) compare and contrast all three spatial allo-cation methods (Thiessen polygons, circular catchments, and cost-surface-derivedcatchments) in the Dolenjska region of Slovenia, showing that territories surround-ing newly established Bronze Age hillforts occur on the edges of earlier CopperAge hillfort catchments, with the same pattern repeated with Iron Age territoriesrelative to Bronze Age ones.Cost surfaces also have been employed as a means to investigate efficientroutes of travel. Madry and Rakos (1996), for example, use the GIS techniqueof "optimum corridor analysis," which allows investigation of alternative travelroutes on a cost surface. They investigate the siting of ancient Celtic roads in theBurgundy region of France. Similarly, Steele et al. (1996) employ cost surfaceson a continental scale to explore possible pathways of the first Americans in thepeopling of the New World.One limitation of the foregoing methods is that they do not consider visibilityof the landscape or of rival or friendly settlements as a means for defining territories,an important dimension that GIS allows us to confront for the first time.Intelvisibility and Viewshed AnalysisPrevious sections have focused on specific environmental features of loca-tions or of local neighborhoods. They have examined methods that carve regions176Kvammeinto territories based largely on simple geometries or on environmental propertiesthrough cost surfaces. Intervisibility studies offer an alternative to the dominanceof these methodologies for examining past behaviors because there is a large socialor even cognitive element involved when human constructions or settlements aresited in a landscape according to properties of view and visibility.A line of sight (LOS) is defined between two points on a landscape if no inter-vening terrain, or feature on the terrain (vegetation, buildings), is higher than thatline. Because terrain form is easily represented within GIS through the DTM, com-putation of the LOS between two points, or even between large groups of points, isa trivial undertaking. Haas and Creamer (1993), for example, determine intervis-ibility between more than 400 potentially defensive sites in Arizona, which theyassert was a key variable in settlement choice among the Kayenta Anasazi. Ozawaet al. (1995) believe that beacon networks may have existed between more than600 hillforts in southern Japan. They employed GIS to investigate intervisibilitybetween them owing to difficulties using traditional field methods stemming fromurbanization (where modern buildings often block views) and access difficulties.Computationally more demanding is the determination of a viewshed, a GISconcept defined as all places visible from a defined point or points (the viewshed,obtained through numerous LOS computations, comes from the term "watershed").The outcome is binary: a "1" indicates all locations visible and a "0" denotes placesunseen. Viewsheds yield a dual perspective. They represent not only all locationsvisible from a locus but also all locations from which a point of interest is visibleŠan important distinction in certain cognitive approaches that seek to determinesignificant symbolic landscape features of the past (Wheatley, 1995b). Most GISapplications allow the viewer's height to be considered (whether standing on theground or on an elevated city wall), and they can factor in potentially blockingland cover such as buildings or vegetation. The latter is accomplished throughmap algebra simply by adding to the DTM the heights of individual structuresand typical heights of various plant cover classes. This rarely has been undertakenin archaeology, however, owing to the difficulty of detailed paleoenvironmentalreconstruction of plant cover distributions. [See Wheatley (1996) for suggestionsin a southern England study.]Viewsheds have achieved great attention in archaeology. Early applicationswere concerned with the simple question of "what is visible?" A viewshed wasdetermined from upper Tonto Ruin, in Tonto National Monument, Arizona, toascertain whether an expansion of the park's boundary was warranted to preservethe view of the natural desert environment in the face of encroaching urbanization(Kvamme, 1992a). Gaffney and Stancic (1991) employ a viewshed to demonstrateintervisibility between watch towers and the early Greek colony of Pharos on theisland of Hvar, Croatia.In recent years viewsheds have received considerable attention from Euro-pean scholars as a means to perceive past social or cognitive landscapes, and evenRecent Directions in GIS177territoriality. Gaffney and van Leusen (1995) argue that human communities im-bued certain locations with value and that views of them were important. Visibilityof monuments or features is seen as a social statement, even as a means of control,as where a view of an imposing hillfort dominates a valley below (Lock and Harris,1996). Emphasizing the importance of the cultural over the natural, a number ofresearchers have shown great zeal in their quest to get at cognition through inter-visibility studies and, in so doing, have developed some rather exciting approaches.Ruggles et al. (1993) define a multiple viewshed, which represents the Booleanunion of individual viewsheds computed from multiple loci of interest. Focusingon the standing stones of the island of Mull, Scotland, they are concerned withhow the visibility of various features may have influenced the development of thecultural landscape and so examine the standing stones with respect to natural hori-zon features and their astronomical potential. Clear associations are demonstratedbetween lunar alignments, the landscape, and the standing stones.Wheatley (1995b, 1996) goes a methodological step further by defining acumulative viewshed, which represents the sum of individual viewsheds. Sinceany one viewshed is binary, the cumulative viewshed is a discrete layer containingn + 1 levels, where any locus can be rated from 0 (not visible from any view-point) to n (visible from all). In map form this "intensity of view" surface indeedrepresents a new way of looking at a landscape because it shows places that tendto be highly visible from prehistoric sites or monuments (the typical viewpoints),therefore suggesting loci of possible cultural importance. Focusing on long bar-rows in the vicinity of Stonehenge and Avebury, in England, Wheatley's (1995b,1996) evidence shows that long barrows in the vicinity of Stonehenge were sitedin places that were highly visible from other long barrows. He therefore argues theimportance of ritual authority that required these structures to be seen. The lackof a similar pattern in the vicinity of Avebury is interpreted as pointing to clearsocial differences between the regions.Gaffney et al. (1995, 1996) essentially copy this approach to demonstraterelationships between highly visible places and multiple rock art and ritual monu-ment classes in Argyll, Scotland. Cumulative viewsheds made it clear that certainareas "achieved prominence" as defined by their "potential perception." For ex-ample, one valley clearly formed "the ritual cognitive focus of the area" (Gaffneyet al., 1995, p. 226).Viewshed analyses also have been utilized to address other research questions.Madry and Rakos (1996) demonstrate that ancient Celtic roads in the Burgundyregion of France were sited with a LOS to a maximum number of hillforts for de-fense of the transportation network. In the Tebenkof Bay area of Alaska, Maschner(1996b) shows that Late Phase villages possessed significantly greater viewshedareas than Middle Phase villages, suggesting that defensibility became more im-portant through time. In contrast, Lock and Harris (1996) conclude in their anal-ysis of Iron Age hillforts near Danebury that all-around visibility for defense was178Kvammesacrificed in favor of maximizing visibility to assert visual dominance over farm-steads in certain valleys.Viewsheds also have been claimed to relate to territoriality (Gaffney and vanLeusen, 1995; Llobera, 1996). Perhaps the best demonstration of this lies in theviewshed analysis of Neolithic long barrows near Danebury (Lock and Harris,1996), which shows that the barrows do not fall within each other's LOS. Eachwas located to exclude others from its viewshed. These results forced Lock andHarris (1996, p. 225) to conclude that viewshed analysis "is a more robust anduseful measure for identifying territoriality . . . than Thiessen polygons."Besides the vegetation cover or "tree" problem, there are many other potentialdifficulties in viewshed analyses that warrant caution. Fisher (1992) demonstratesconsiderable uncertainty in viewshed boundaries owing to variances in DTM thatstem from differences between interpolation methods and in the viewshed algo-rithms themselves. Ruggles and Medyckyj-Scott (1996) show how to allow forthe curvature of the earth when considering large distances. The atmospheric hazefactor, which detracts from the perfect viewing conditions assumed in most anal-yses, also has been considered. One solution is to combine the binary viewshedwith a distance decay function through map algebra to better model what might bediscernable under more typical viewing conditions (Fisher, 1992; Wheatley, 1996).On a more theoretical level, viewshed correlations are possibly only a proxyfor other environmental factors that may have influenced site placement. For ex-ample, viewshed correspondences with site locations may only be an artifact oftheir high ridge line placements in some contexts where views were not importantbut certain food or other resources were. Another difficulty is the contemporaneityissue. In Wheatley's (1995b, 1996) Stonehenge analysis, for example, the longbarrows were not all built on the same day. Analyzing all such sites together asif they existed at the same time can only inflate the intervisibility counts and theperceived significance of the outcome. Although viewsheds have been hailed as ameans to get at "cognition" and away from the more common GIS focus on envi-ronmental correlates (see below), Maschner (1996c) observes that if the landscapeof a region were flat, then viewshed relationships could not exist, making this"social mechanism" environmentally determined after all by a rolling hill country.SimulationGIS provides great potential in the area of regional simulation because itsaccurate portrayal of actual physical landscape features and environment adds anew dimension of realism. This spirit is captured in a dynamic simulation by VanWest (1994) that examines whether droughts were responsible for the late 13th-century abandonment of southwestern Colorado by the Anasazi. Temperature andprecipitation data recorded through the past century were used to compute PalmerRecent Directions in GIS179Drought Severity Indices (PDSI; a measure of annual soil moisture conditions) formultiple soil classes and elevation ranges. These PDSI values then were correlatedwith historic tree ring widths, yielding a regression function that made it possibleto retrodict the PDSI for all soils and elevation ranges back in time on the basis ofthe prehistoric tree ring record. Agricultural yield studies then were linked with thePDSI on an annual basis, from AD 901-1300, allowing yearly maps of productivity(at 200 m resolution) throughout the 1,800 km2 study region (these 400 maps werelater animated in a movie). Results indicated that despite poor years, agriculturalproductivity always could have been high enough to support thousands of people,reducing the credibility of the drought-caused abandonment theory.Recently, Van West and Kohler (1996) exploit this GIS database again, but thistime food pooling behavior is examined through simulation. They argue that foodpooling is a form of risk aversion favorable in periods of high mean and variableproductivity, but that it breaks down in times of low yields. Ten unfavorable, neutral,and favorable periods for pooling are established through the paleoenvironmentalsimulation and are shown generally to agree with key indicators of food pooling,or the lack of it, in the archaeological record.Many GIS-based simulations have been concerned with settlement behav-ior at the regional level. Kohler and Gumerman (1996), for example, utilize thesouthwestern Colorado database of the previous studies and loose automata, eachrepresenting a household constrained by very simple decision rules, to observe theirlocation decision solutions as part of a broad-based study of settlement choice. GISalso has facilitated what might be the only application of location-allocation mod-eling in archaeology. Through it Ruggles and Church (1996) take a sophisticatedlook at the Aztec settlement system and the movement of goods in the Basin ofMexico. Through a modified Thiessen polygon approach based on the locations ofknown regional centers, they simulate a wide variety of network approximations,model assumptions, and parameter ranges that demonstrate a dendritic settlementsystem and a "fairly efficient pattern of collection and transport of . . . surplus andfor administration of population" (Ruggles and Church, 1996, p. 173).The spread of European populations through the waterways of New York from1608 to 1810 is simulated by Zubrow (1990b) in a rare archaeological exampleof the vector-based network analysis capability of GIS. Using various initial col-onization points and impedance-to-movement values assigned to each waterwaysegment or arc, Zubrow explored the nature and speed of patterns of migration andcompared them against recorded historical circumstances. Other studies have sim-ulated isostatic rebound to examine its effect on prehistoric settlement in Finland(Nunez et al., 1995) and employed hydrological modeling and flood simulation tobetter understand Middle Neolithic distributions in the Tisza Valley of Hungary(Gillings, 1995).The versatility of GIS for addressing problems at virtually any spatial scaleis illustrated at one end of the spectrum in a rare intrasite simulation by Kvamme1803 Kvamme(1996a). In this study dense debitage accumulation patterns are generated by takingexperimentally produced scatters and randomly superimposing them in a confinedspace. The results are compared against archaeological scatters and theoreticalmodels to support arguments for a spatial sorting phenomenon in their formationprocess. At quite the opposite end of the spectrum, Steele et al. (1996) simulate thepeopling of North America under various demographic parameters, first using anisotropic surface and then with actual North American landscape features. The lat-ter vividly illustrates the effects of landform on the cost of travel-derived pathwaysof the first peoples. Finally, at an even more global scale, Zubrow (1997) combinesprehistoric data, navigational and content analysis of ship logs, and GIS to dynam-ically simulate the spread of major epidemic diseases in the New World frompoints of contact with Europeans during the voyages of exploration from 1492 to1650. Several insights are gained including likely conduits and population densitiesnecessary for disease transmission, the scheduling of depopulation, and relativemagnitudes of decimation as a function of location and number of points of contact.PROBLEMS, PROSPECTS, AND CONCLUSIONSGIS and the Postmodern CritiqueGo to, let us go down, and there confound their language, that they may notunderstand one another's speech.ŠGenesis 11:7, The Holy Bible (King James Version)The growing dominance of GIS and its impact on anything spatial has beenhailed as the "quantifier's revenge" on postmodernists (Oppenshaw, 1991, p. 621).Yet, despite the generally upbeat, positive, and even euphoric praise of its archaeo-logical potential, the picture is not very rosy for some more seasoned practitioners.Too many archaeological GIS investigations focus only on the physical environ-ment. This circumstance derives from the fact that maps of the environmentŠtopography, hydrology, soils, geologyŠare relatively easy to obtain. It is muchmore difficult to acquire maps of contemporary settlements, economic or religiouscenters, road networks, or political spheres of influence, for example. Such datasets typically require extensive prior research or a well-developed knowledge baseof a region. Van Leusen (1996, p. 182) observes: "It is not simply that culturalconditions in the past have little or no bearing . . . but that they are either largelyunknown, or unmappable." Moreover, all too often the establishment of contem-poraneity, a prerequisite for the investigation of a social landscape, is difficult toachieve, as when working with prehistoric hunting and gathering camps.Environmental Determinism. In recent years the foregoing debate has be-come quite polarized. Many European scholars view the social landscape as centralRecent Directions in GIS181to understanding the past and either reject outright the natural for the cultural orperceive the former as mere noise that should be filtered out (Gillings and Goodrick,1996). Indeed, Wheatley (1993) has gone so far as to suggest a "hidden agenda"behind GIS technology that encourages a functionalist perspective. Others agree(e.g., Gaffney and van Leusen, 1995; Gillings and Goodrick, 1996; Harris andLock, 1995; Llobera, 1996), arguing that because of this bias GIS cannot be theo-retically neutral. But does this bias stem from GIS or from the nature of the datawe use? Did it not exist long before GIS when archaeologists worked primarilywith paper maps? Maschner (1996c), for example, emphasizes that GIS is only atool, inherently atheoretical, as is mass spectrometry or microwear analysis.One unfortunate outcome of this debate lies in the label of "environmentaldeterminism" that is commonly applied to studies that focus on environmentalrelationships (e.g., Gaffney and van Leusen, 1995; Harris and Lock, 1995; Llobera,1996; Lock, 1995). Yet, in practice, no archaeologist today believes that everythingin the past was environmentally determined, especially in contexts where onemerely wants to ascertain if agriculturally based settlements in a region illustrateassociations with certain soil classes, for example. Moreover, it seems silly, asone reviewer of this paper pointed out, to argue over an implicit assumption thatenvironmental and human systems are somehow not part of the same world!Recently, Maschner (1996c, p. 507) attempts a reconciliation by stressingthe interrelationship between the social-cognitive and environmental domains. Henotes, for example, that although warfare might have large cognitive and symboliccomponents, the choice of defensible location is due largely to landform and that alocation selected only for its cognitive or symbolic value "quickly leads to a lack ofsymbolizers". Similarly, Kvamme (1997) discusses how a regression analysis canmollify the controversy simply by demonstrating that some portion of the variancein settlement location is explained by social variables while other portions are ac-counted for by environment. Yet, Gillings and Goodrick (1996), Harris and Lock(1995), Llobera (1996), and others, go a step further by suggesting that variousforms of determinism are inherent to GIS and stem from the nature of the tech-nology itself and the geographical techniques upon which it is based. As a result,they see no difference between the results of social-cognitive and environmentalanalyses because both are constrained by essentially the same methods. Whilethese complaints are too numerous to fully address here, several warrant specialconsideration.Wheatley (1993) originally pointed out in the archaeological literature thatthe Cartesian space of GIS may not be the most appropriate model for the wayhumans view space. In support, he observes that before modern maps the Isle ofWight, England, was originally portrayed as being much longer than it really isowing to the influence of offshore currents on local perception. These critics seemunaware of the field of "mental mapping" in human geography where dealing withwarped perceptual spaces is the norm and where methods have been long around182Kvammefor handling them (e.g., see Gould and White; 1974). Logarithmic, polynomial, orrubber sheet transformations of space, all readily handled by GIS, might be appro-priate considerations and, indeed, are utilized by Zubrow (1994) in an analysis ofprehistoric Iroquoian cognitive spaces in New York.Harris and Lock (1995) and Lock (1995) lament that GIS is spatially determin-istic because all elements are required to possess exact coordinates, a circumstancenot well suited for imprecisely located or fuzzy archaeological information. If ar-chaeological data are sloppy, then we need to change our recording habits andemploy appropriate technology such as global positioning systems (GPS) andlaser theodolites to obtain accurate field information, as illustrated in recent land-scape archaeology approaches where surface mappings of tens of thousands ofartifacts are obtained across large regions (Ebert et al., 1996; Holdaway, 1996;Kvamme, 1996a). For extant and traditionally recorded "site" data, dashed or dot-ted lines (Miller, 1995) or fuzzy or probabilistic boundaries (Fisher, 1992) mightbe employed.Gaffney and van Leusen (1995) complain of the loss of detail and resolutionof excavated data when archaeological sites are treated as points. Harris and Lock(1995) suggest much the same thing, arguing that it might be appropriate to treatlithic scatters in the American Southwest as points, but that in Europe the recordconsists of rich polygons in complex palimpsests. These are scale-dependent ar-guments. Zoom in enough and even artifacts have area. At the regional level wefrequently can treat settlements as points or perhaps utilize site-center coordinatesto exploit the rich library of point-based analysis methods. If this is not appropriateat a given scale, then a suite of area-based analysis methods exists and should beexamined (see Unwin, 1981, pp. 111-152).Prospects and Future DirectionsLike the automobile and indoor plumbing, GIS won't be an importanttechnology until it fades into the fabric of society and is taken for granted.It must become second nature for accessing information and translating itinto knowledge. We must shift its emphasis beyond mapping to spatialreasoning.ŠBerry, Spatial Reasoning for Effective GISAlthough predicting the future is a hazardous undertaking, there are a numberof unmistakable trends that can be forecast for GIS in archaeology. Foremost amongthem is that GIS-driven databases will ultimately form the standard vehicle for datamanagement and access at national, state, local, and even site levels, and these sys-tems will not simply include data plus maps. Multimedia presentations also willoffer video, sound, photographs, drawings, and animated three-dimensional viewsRecent Directions in GIS183(Harris and Lock, 1995, p. 359). Comprehensive management databases that incor-porate all possible sources of knowledge about an archaeological site will becomemore common. Surface microtopography, mapped surface finds, data from testpits and excavations, aerial photographs, and many multispectral and geophysicalremote sensing products, all combined in one place, will yield tremendous po-tential for understanding site content, organization, and structure. We are seeingthe beginning of these trends now (e.g., Gaffney and van Leusen, 1996; Richards,1996). With the Internet and World Wide Web (WWW), archaeological databaseswill be made available globally. This factor alone represents the most profound de-velopment of the future. It will change everything. In this vein Farley and Gisiger(1996) describe "corporate databases," which are shared information resourcesthat are platform and software independent, distributed across widely separatedgeographic locations.The archaeological potential of remotely sensed satellite data is about to growrapidly. Within the next several years public domain satellites will be launchedthat will yield multispectral data with spatial resolutions in the 1-5 m range,completely revamping the utility of these data for archaeology (Limp, 1996). Withthese resolutions it will be possible to not only conduct within-site investigationsfrom space that will be able to identify individual surface or near-surface featuresbut also undertake such things as the periodic monitoring of important sites forthe effects of erosion or vandalism. In any case, a common view in the larger GIScommunity is that most base maps in the future will ultimately be derived fromremotely sensed satellite sources (Star and Estes, 1990).True three-dimensional GIS applications only now are making inroads(Harris and Lock, 1996), but they are sure to form a core tool for handling within-site data ranging from artifact distributions to archaeological deposits and historicstructures owing to their superior functionality over CAD. The three-dimensionalenvironment brings forth the area of virtual reality. Already available are on-linetours of reconstructed ancient buildings or the creation of realistic, data rich, or"sensuous" landscapes (e.g., Gillings and Goodrick, 1996) within which one canimmerse oneself through head-mounted stereoscopic visualization gear or otherdevices (Forte and Guidazzoli, 1996). Virtual reality will surely create a closerlink with the past for the lay public through museum displays, the classroom,the WWW, and commercial offerings and will be a real boon to more human-istic archaeologies (e.g., see Gillings and Goodrick, 1996; Llobera, 1996; Lock,1995).The link between GIS and GPS is unstoppable in commercial, government,and research sectors. Archaeologists do fieldwork, they must accurately locatethemselves and what they find, and they map their results. GPS has already gainedlarge acceptance in our discipline (e.g., Estrada Belli, 1997; Lang, 1994; Limp,1996) and will continue to do so as the technology improves and decreases in cost.In the not so distant future all survey information will be GPS-driven.184KvammeIn a future facing unlimited population growth, urbanization, and scarcerresources, including cultural resources, planning and management will assumegreater importance. GIS-based predictive models of archaeological location willtherefore become increasingly relevant because they provide a means for makingobjective and testable statements, in map form, about the nature of past culturaldistributions. They can provide planners and managers with a tool that results incost savings and conservation of the resource base (Parker, 1986). We are alreadyseeing this happening with state-sponsored modeling projects of tremendous scopein several provinces of Canada for forestry planning (Dalla Bona, 1993; DallaBona and Larcombe, 1996), in Minnesota with a statewide model in response totransportation planning (Hobbs, 1996), and in the Netherlands as part of a generalguidance tool in one of the most densely populated countries on the planet (vanLeusen, 1996).On a more cautionary note, we are moving into a "point and click" universewhere powerful tools are readily available and the potential for abuse is great.Students need to receive training in basic computer science to understand whatcomputers and GIS do with data, in cartography to understand basic scale andrepresentational issues, and in fundamental data analysis principles to make validinferences from vast bodies of information in computer graphic displays. An analogof 20 years ago exists where easy access to powerful statistical software led tounprecedented abuse in the absence of formal statistical training across the socialsciences.In a prescient discussion Oppenshaw (1991, p. 625) forecast that "we areheading for an immensely data-rich but theory-poor world." Yet, through infor-mation management tools like GIS we might hope to unlock and eventually un-derstand important patterns and relationships that lie encrypted within the world'sdatabases. A data-rich environment with the ability to easily visualize complexrelationships can only lead to improved insights that will ultimately produce bettertheory and understanding of the world. Indeed, perhaps a lack of sufficient dataand the means to handle and visualize them has inhibited productive theory gen-eration in the highly multidimensional social sciences, of which archaeology isonly a small part. [Lave and March (1975, p. 2) may have been right when theycomplained that "God has chosen to give the easy problems to the physicists."] Ican't wait for the future!ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I wish to thank the countless colleagues and students who have shared theirproblems and insights about GIS with me through the years. Special thanks go toGary Lock, Herb Maschner, Gary Feinman, and an anonymous reviewer for theircomments, which contributed substantially to the improvement of this manuscript.Recent Directions in GIS185As always, Jo Ann Christein provided important suggestions, discussion, andsupport.REFERENCES CITEDAberg, F. A., and Leech, R. H. (1992). The national archaeological record for England: Past, present andfuture. In Larsen, C. (ed.), Sites and Monuments: National Archaeological Records, The NationalMuseum of Denmark, Copenhagen, pp. 157-170.Aldenderfer, M. (1992). The state of GIS and anthropological research. Anthropological Newsletter 3:14.Aldenderfer, M. (1996). Introduction. In Aldenderfer, M., and Maschner, H. D. G. (eds.), Anthropology,Space and Geographic Information Systems, Oxford University Press, New York, pp. 3-18.Allen, K. M. S. (1996). Iroquoian landscapes: People, environments, and the GIS context. In MaschnerH. D. G. (ed.), New Methods, Old Problems: Geographic Information Systems in Modern Archae-ological Research, Occasional Paper, No. 23, Center for Archaeological Investigations, SouthernIllinois University, Carbondale, pp. 198-222.Altschul, J. H. (1990). Red flag models: The use of modelling in management contexts. In Allen, K. M.S., Green, S. W., and Zubrow, E. B. W. (eds.), Interpreting Space: GIS and Archaeology, Taylor,and Francis, London, pp. 236-238.Andresen, J., and Madsen, T. (1992). Data structures for excavation recording. A case of complexinformation management. In Larsen, C. (ed.), Sites and Monuments: National ArchaeologicalRecords, The National Museum of Denmark, Copenhagen, pp. 23-42.Arnold, J. B., III (1979), Archaeological applications of computer drawn contour and three dimen-sional perspective plots. In Upham, S. (ed.), Computer Graphics in Archaeology, AnthropologicalResearch Papers, No. 15, Arizona State University, Tempe, pp. 1-15.Arroyo-Bishop, D. (1991). The ArchaeoDATA system: Towards a European archaeological document.In Lockyear, K., and Rahtz, S. P. Q. (eds.), Computer Applications and Quantitative Methods inArchaeology, 1990, BAR International Series, No. 565, Oxford, pp. 61-70.Arroyo-Bishop, D. (1992). Further structuring of the ArcheoDATA system. In Lock, G., and Moffett, J.(eds.), Computer Applications and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology, 1991, BAR InternationalSeries, No. S577, Oxford, pp. 89-94.Arroyo-Bishop, D., and Zarzosa, L. (1992). The ArchaeoDATA system: A method for structuring aEuropean archaeological information system (AIS). In Larsen, C. (ed.), Sites and Monuments:National Archaeological Records, The National Museum of Denmark, Copenhagen, pp. 133-156.Arroyo-Bishop, D., and Zarzosa, L. (1995). To be or not to be: Will an object-space-time GIS/AISbecome a reality or end up an archaeological entity? In Lock, G. R., and StanCiC, Z. (eds.),Archaeology and Geographical Information Systems: A European Perspective, Taylor and Francis,London, pp. 43-54.Baena, J., Blasco, C., and Recuero, V. (1995). The spatial analysis of Bell Beaker sites in the Madridregion. In Lock, G., and Stancic, Z. (eds.), Archaeology and Geographical Information Systems:A European Perspective, Taylor and Francis, London, pp. 101-116.Bamforth, D. B. (1994). Discussant remarks in the symposium "Albert Spaulding and the continuation ofarchaeological science," presented at the annual meeting of the Society for American Archaeology,Anaheim, CA.Bampton, M., and Hamilton, N. (1996). GIS, education and stewardship in Casco Bay Estuary, Maine.In Bietti, A., Cazzella, A., Johnson, I., and Voorrips, A. (eds.), The Colloquia of the XIII Interna-tional Congress of Prehistoric and Protohistoric Sciences, Vol. 1: Theoretical and MethodologicalProblems, ABACO, Forli, Italy, pp. 1-58.Beex, W. (1995). From excavation drawing to archaeological playground: CAD applications for exca-vations. In Wilcock, J., and Lockyear, K. (eds.), Computer Applications and Quantitative Methodsin Archaeology 1993, BAR International Series, No. 598, Oxford, pp. 101-108.Berry, J. K. (1995). Spatial Reasoning for Effective GIS, GIS World, Inc., Fort Collins, Co.Bfro, K. T., and Fejes, I. Sz. (1995). GIS applications at the Hungarian National Museum, Department186Kvammeof Information. In Lock, G., and Stancic, Z. (eds.). Archaeology and Geographical InformationSystems: A European Perspective, Taylor and Francis, London, pp. 261-268.Biskowski, M. (1994). GIS and the study of grinding tools in the Teotihuacan Valley, Mexico. InJohnson, I. (ed.), Methods in the Mountains: Proceedings of UISPP Commission IV Meeting,Mount Victoria, Australia, Archaeological Methods Series, No, 2, Sydney University, Sydney, pp.115-134.Biswell, S., Cropper, L., Evans, J., Gaffney, V., and Leach, P. (1995). GIS and excavation: A cautionarytale from Shepton Mallet, Somerset, England. In Lock, G., and StanCiC, Z. (eds.), Archaeologyand Geographical Information Systems: A European Perspective, Taylor and Francis, London,pp. 269-286.Boaz, J. S., and Uleberg, E. (1993). Gardermoen Project: Use of a GIS system in antiquities registrationand research. In Andresen, J., Madsen, T., and Scollar, I. (eds.), Computing the Past: ComputerApplications and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology, CAA92, Aarhus University Press, Aarhus,Denmark, pp. 177-182.Bosqued, C. B., Preysler, J. B., and Expiago, J. (1996). The role of GIS in the management of archae-ological data: An example of application for the Spanish administration. In Aldenderfer, M., andMaschner, H. D. G. (eds.), Anthropology, Space and Geographic Information Systems, OxfordUniversity Press, New York, pp. 190-201.Brandt, R., Groenewoudt, B. J., and Kvamme, K. L. (1992) An experiment in archaeological sitelocation: Modeling in the Netherlands using GIS techniques. World Archaeology 24: 268-282.Canouts, V. (1992). Computerized information exchange on the local and natural levels in USA. InLarsen, C. (ed.). Sites and Monuments: National Archaeological Records, The National Museumof Denmark, Copenhagen, pp. 231-248.Carmichael. D. L. (1990). GIS predictive modelling of prehistoric site distributions in central Montana.In Allen, K. M. S., Green, S. W., and Zubrow, E. B. W. (eds.), Interpreting Space: GIS andArchaeology, Taylor and Francis, London, pp. 216-225.Carr, C. (1985). Introductory remarks on regional analysis. In Carr, C. (ed.), For Concordance inArchaeological Analysis: Bridging Data Structure, Quantitative Technique, and Theory, WestportPublishers, Kansas City, MO, pp. 114-127.Carr, T. L., and Turner, M. D. (19%). Investigating regional lithic procurement using multispectralimagery and geophysical exploration. Archaeological Prospection 3: 109-128.Chadwick, A. J. (1978). A computer simulation of Mycenean settlement. In Hodder, I. (ed.). SimulationStudies in Archaeology, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 47-57.Chadwick, A. J. (1979). Settlement simulation. In Renfrew, C., and Cooke, D. (eds.), Transformations:Mathematical Approaches to Culture Change, Academic Press, New York, pp. 237-255.Chartrand, J. A. (1996). Archaeological resource visibility and GIS: A case study in Yorkshire. InKamermans, H., and Fennema, K. (eds.), Interfacing the Past: Computer Applications and Quan-titative Methods in Archaeology, CAA9S, Vol. 2, Analecta Praehistorica Leidensia, No. 28, Uni-versity of Leiden, Leiden, pp. 387-398.Chartrand, J., Richards, J., and Vyner, B. (1993). Bridging the urban-rural gap: GIS and the YorkEnvirons Project. In Andresen, J., Madsen, T., and Scollar, 1. (eds.), Computing the Past: ComputerApplications and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology, CAA92, Aarhus University Press, Aarhus,Denmark, pp. 159-166.Clark, G. A. (1979). Spatial association at Liencres, an early Holocene open site on the Santander coast,north-central Spain. In Upham, S. (ed.), Computer Graphics in Archaeology, AnthropologicalResearch Papers, No. 15, Arizona State University, Tempe, pp. 121-43.Copp, S. A. (1977). A quick plotting program for archaeological data. Newsletter of Computer Archae-ology 13: 17-25.Cowen, D. J. (1988). GIS versus CAD versus DBMS: What are the differences? PhotogrammetricEngineering and Remote Sensing 54: 1551-1555.Csaki, G., Jerem, E., and Redo, F. (1995). Data recording and GIS applications in landscape and intra-site analysis: Case studies in progress at the Archaeological Institute of the Hungarian Academy ofSciences. In Lock, G., and Stancic, Z. (eds.), Archaeology and Geographical Information Systems:A European Perspective, Taylor and Francis, London, pp. 85-100.Dalla Bona, L. (1993). A preliminary predictive model of prehistoric activity location for the westernLake Nipigon watershed. Archaeological Computing Newsletter 37: 11-19.Recent Directions in GIS187Dalla Bona, L., and Larcombe, L. (1996). Modeling prehistoric land use in northern Ontario. InMaschner H. D. G. (ed.), New Methods, Old Problems: Geographic Information Systems in ModernArchaeological Research, Occasional Paper, No. 23, Center for Archaeological Investigations,Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, pp. 252-274.David, A. (1995). Geophysical Survey in Archaeological Field Evaluation, Research and ProfessionalServices Guideline, No. 1, English Heritage Society, London.de Lapparent, V., Geller, M. J., and Huchra, J. P. (1986). A slice of the universe. Astrophysical Journal(Letters) 302: L1-L5.Doody, M., Synnott, P., Tobin, R., and Masterson, B. (1995). A topographic survey of the inlandpromontory fort at Castle Gale, Carrig Henry, County Limerick. In Discovery Programme Reports2: Project Results 1993, Royal Irish Academy, Dublin, pp. 39-44.Dunnell, R. C., and Dancey, W. S. (1983). The siteless survey: A regional scale data collection strategy.In Schiffer, M. B. (ed.), Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory, Vol. 6, Academic Press,New York, pp. 267-287.Ebert, J. I. (1978). Remote sensing and large-scale cultural resources management. In Lyons, T. R.,and Ebert, J. I. (eds.), Remote Sensing and Nondestructive Archaeology, National Park Service,Washington, DC, pp. 21-34.Ebert, J. I. (1988). Remote sensing in archaeological prospection and prediction. In Judge, W. J.,and Sebastian, L. (eds.), Quantifying the Present and Predicting the Past: Theory, Method, andApplication of Archaeological Predictive Modeling, U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau ofLand Management, Denver, pp. 429-492.Ebert, J. I., Camilli, E. L., and Berman, M. J. (1996). GIS in the analysis of distributional archaeo-logical data. In Maschner H. D. G. (ed.), New Methods, Old Problems: Geographic InformationSystems in Modern Archaeological Research, Occasional Paper, No. 23, Center for ArchaeologicalInvestigations, Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, pp. 25-37.Effland, R. W. (1979). Statistical distribution cartography and computer graphics. In Upham, S. (ed.)Computer Graphics in Archaeology, Anthropological Research Papers, No. 15, Arizona StateUniversity, Tempe, pp. 17-29.Estrada Belli, F. (1997). GPS and GIS as aids for mapping archaeological sites. Archaeological Com-puting Newsletter 47: 5-10.Farley, J. A., Limp, W. F., and Lockhart, J. (1990). The archaeologist's workbench: Integrating GIS,remote sensing, EDA and database management. In Allen, K. M. S., Green, S. W., and Zubrow,E. B. W. (eds.), Interpreting Space: GIS and Archaeology, Taylor and Francis, London, pp. 141-164.Farley, J. A., and Gisiger, A. (1996). Managing the infrastructure: The use of a corporate metadata forarchaeology. In Maschner H. D. G. (ed.), New Methods, Old Problems: Geographic InformationSystems in Modern Archaeological Research, Occasional Paper, No. 23, Center for ArchaeologicalInvestigations, Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, pp. 275-300.Feder, K. L. (1979). Geographic patterning of tool types as elicited by trend surface analysis. In Upham,S. (ed.), Computer Graphics in Archaeology, Anthropological Research Papers, No. 15, ArizonaState University, Tempe, pp. 95-102.Fisher, P. (1992). First experiments in viewshed uncertainty: Simulating fuzzy viewsheds. Photogram-metric Engineering and Remote Sensing 58: 345-352.Fisher, P. F., and Lindenberg, R. E. (1989). On distinctions among cartography, remote sensing, andgeographic information systems. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing 55: 1431-1434.Flude, K., George, S., and Roskams, S. (1982). Uses of an archaeological database with particular refer-ence to computer graphics and the writing-up process. In Computer Applications in Archaeology1981, Institute of Archaeology, University of London, London, pp. 64-75.Forte, M. (1995). Scientific visualization and archaeological landscape: The case study of a Terramarra,Italy. In Lock, G., and Stancic, Z. (eds.), Archaeology and Geographical Information Systems: AEuropean Perspective, Taylor and Francis, London, pp. 231-238.Forte, M., and Guidazzoli, A. (1996). Archaeology, GIS and desktop virtual reality: The ARCTOSProject. In Kamermans, H., and Fennema, K. (eds.), Interfacing the Past: Computer Applicationsand Quantitative Methods in Archaeology, CAA95, Vol. 2, Analecta Praehistorica Leidensia, No.28, University of Leiden, Leiden, pp. 443-456.188KvammeGaffney, V., and Stancic, Z. (1991). G1S Approaches to Regional Analysis: A Case Study of the Islandof Hvar, Znanstveni Institut Filozofske Fakultete, Ljubljana.Gaffney, V., and van Leusen, P. M. (1995). Postscript: GIS, environmental determinism and archaeol-ogy. In Lock, G., and StanCiC, Z. (eds.), Archaeology and Geographical Information Systems: AEuropean Perspective, Taylor and Francis, London, pp. 367-382.Gaffney, V., and van Leusen, M. (1996). Extending G1S methods for regional archaeology: The Wrox-eter Hinterland Project. In Kamermans, H., and Fennema, K. (eds.), Interfacing the Past: ComputerApplications and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology, CAA95, Vol. 2, Analecta PraehistoricaLeidensia, No. 28, University of Leiden, Leiden, pp. 297-305.Gaffney, V., OStir, K., Podobnikar, T., and StanCiC, Z. (1996). Satellite imagery and GIS applica-tions in Mediterranean landscapes. In Kamermans, H., and Fennema, K. (eds.), Interfacing thePast: Computer Applications and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology, CAA95, Vol. 2, AnalectaPraehistorica Leidensia, No. 28, University of Leiden, Leiden, pp. 337-342.Gaffney, V., Stancic, Z., and Watson, H. (1995). The impact of GIS on archaeology: A personalperspective. In Lock, G., and StanCiC, Z. (eds.), Archaeology and Geographical InformationSystems: A European Perspective, Taylor and Francis, London, pp. 211-230.Gaffney, V., StanCiC, Z., and Watson, H. (1996). Moving from catchments to cognition: Tentative stepstoward a larger archaeological context for GIS. In Aldenderfer, M., and Maschner, H. D. G. (eds.),Anthropology, Space and Geographic Information Systems, Oxford University Press, New York,pp. 132-154.Geller, M. J. (1988). Mapping the universe: Slices and bubbles. In Cornell, J. (ed.), Bubbles, Voids,and Bumps in Time: The New Cosmology, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 50-72.Gillings, M. (1995). Flood dynamics and settlement in the Tisza Valley of north-east Hungary: GISand the upper Tisza Project. In Lock, G., and StanCiC, Z. (eds.), Archaeology and GeographicalInformation Systems: A European Perspective, Taylor and Francis, London, pp. 67-84.Gillings, M., and Goodrick, G. T. (1996). Sensuous and reflexive GIS: Exploring visualization andVRML. Internet Archaeology 1: (http://intarch.ac.uk/journal/issuel/gillings-toc.html).Gould, P., and White, R. (1974). Mental Maps, Penguin Books, New York.Green, D. F., and Stewart, J. B. (1983), Computer generated research aids using the forest service DTISII system. Advances in Computer Archaeology 1: 4-25.Groenewoudt, B. J., and Wiemer, R. (1993). Valkenburg-Marktveld: Analyzing the predictive potentialof Roman surface scatters using GIS. In Van Dierendonck, R. M., Hallewas, D. P., and Waugh,K. E. (eds.). The Valkenburg Excavations 1985-1988: Introduction and Detail Studies, Rijksdienstvoor bet Oudheidkundig Bodemonderzoek, Amersfoort, Netherlands, pp. 47-81.Guillot, D. (1992). The national archaeological record of France: Advances in computerization. InLarsen, C. (ed.), Sites and Monuments: National Archaeological Records, The National Museumof Denmark, Copenhagen, pp. 125-132.Guillot, D., and Leroy, G. (1995). The use of GIS for archaeological resource management in France:The SCALA Project, with a case study in Picardie. In Lock, G., and StanCiC, Z. (eds.), Archaeologyand Geographical Information Systems: A European Perspective, Taylor and Francis, London,pp. 15-26.Haas, J., and Creamer, W. (1993). Stress and Warfare Among the Kayenta Anasazi of the ThirteenthCentury A.D., Fieldiana Anthropology New Series, No. 21, Field Museum of Anthropology,Chicago.Hall, S. S. (1992). Mapping the Next Millenium: How Computer-Driven Cartography Is Revolutionizingthe Face of Science, Random House, New York.Hansen, H. J. (1993). European archaeological databases: Problems and prospects. In Andresen, J.,Madsen, T., and Scollar, I. (eds.), Computing the Past: Computer Applications and QuantitativeMethods in Archaeology, CAA92, Aarhus University Press, Aarhus, Denmark, pp. 229-238.Harris, T. M., and Lock, G. R. (1990). The diffusion of a new technology: A perspective on the adoptionof a geographic information system within UK archaeology. In Allen, K. M. S., Green, S. W., andZubrow, E. B. W. (eds.), Interpreting Space: GIS and Archaeology, Taylor and Francis, London,pp. 33-53.Harris, T. M., and Lock, G. R. (1992). Toward a regional GIS site information retrieval system:The Oxfordshire sites and monuments record (SMR) prototype. In Larsen, C. (ed.), Sites andRecent Directions in GIS189Monuments: National Archaeological Records, The National Museum of Denmark, Copenhagen,pp. 185-199.Harris, T., and Lock, G. (1995). Toward an evaluation of GIS in European archaeology: The past,present and future of theory and applications. In Lock, G., and Stancic, Z. (eds.), Archaeologyand Geographical Information Systems: A European Perspective, Taylor and Francis, London,pp. 349-366.Harris, T. M., and Lock, G. R. (1996). Multi-dimensional GIS: Exploratory approaches to spatial andtemporal relationships within archaeological stratigraphy. In Kamermans, H., and Fennema, K.(eds.), Interfacing the Past: Computer Applications and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology,CAA95, Vol. 2, Analecta Praehistorica Leidensia, No. 28, University of Leiden, Leiden, pp. 307-316.Hasenstab, R. J. (1983). A Preliminary Cultural Resource Sensitivity Analysis for the Proposed FloodControl Facilities Construction in the Passaic River Basin of New Jersey, Report submitted to thePassaic River Basin Special Studies Branch, Department of the Army, New York District ArmyCorps of Engineers, Soil Systems, Inc., Marietta, GA.Hasenstab, R. J. (1996). Settlement as adaptation: Variability in Iroquois village site selection as inferredthrough GIS. In Maschner H. D. G. (ed.), New Methods, Old Problems: Geographic InformationSystems in Modern Archaeological Research, Occasional Paper, No. 23, Center for ArchaeologicalInvestigations, Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, pp. 223-241.Hasenstab, R. J., and Resnick, B. (1990). GIS in historical predictive modelling: The Fort Drumproject. In Allen, K. M. S., Green, S. W., and Zubrow, E. B. W. (eds.), Interpreting Space: GISand Archaeology, Taylor and Francis, London, pp. 284-306.Hinshelwood, A., and Dalla Bona, L. (1994). GIS and intrasite analysis: An example from northwesternOntario. Archaeological Computing Newsletter 40: 12-20.Hobbs, E. (1996). Preliminary results from Mn/Model. Mn/Model Newsletter 2: 1-3.Hodder, I., and Orton, C. (1976). Spatial Analysis in Archaeology, Cambridge University Press, Cam-bridge.Holdaway, S. (1996). GIS and open site archeology in western New South Wales, Australia. In Bietti, A.,Cazzella, A., Johnson, I., and Voorrips, A. (eds.), The Colloquia of the XIII International Congressof Prehistoric and Protohistoric Sciences, Vol. I: Theoretical and Methodological Problems,ABACO, Forli, Italy, p. 218.Hunt, E. D. (1992). Upgrading site-catchment analyses with the use of GIS: Investigating the settlementpatterns of horticulturists. World Archaeology 24: 283-309.Johnson, J. K. (1996). Delta digitizing: GIS and remote sensing in northwest Mississippi. In MaschnerH. D. G. (ed.). New Methods, Old Problems: Geographic Information Systems in Modem Archae-ological Research, Occasional Paper, No. 23, Center for Archaeological Investigations, SouthernIllinois University, Carbondale, pp. 242-251.Johnson, J. K., Madry, S. L. H., and Sever, T. (1988). Remote sensing and GIS analysis in large scalesurvey design in north Mississippi. Southeastern Archaeology 7: 124-131.Jones, J. (1996). TMAPPER! High quality map production with 1DR1S1 vector data. ArchaeologicalComputing Newsletter 45: 5-11.Judge, W. J., and Sebastian, L. (eds.) (1988). Quantifying the Present and Predicting the Past: Theory,Method, and Application of Archaeological Predictive Modeling, U.S. Bureau of Land Manage-ment, Department of the Interior, Denver.Kirkinen, T. (1996). Center in the wilderness area using a geographical information system (GIS) inmodelling the Late Iron Age settlement in eastern Finland. In Bietti, A., Cazzella, A., Johnson, I.,and Voorrips, A. (eds.), The Colloquia of the XIII International Congress of Prehistoric andProtohistoric Sciences, Vol. 1: Theoretical and Methodological Problems, ABACO, Forli, Italy,pp. 93-100.Kohler, T. A., and Gumerman, G. J. (1996). Beyond GIS: Populating worlds with agents. In Bietti, A.,Cazzella, A., Johnson, I., and Voorrips, A. (eds.), The Colloquia of the XIII International Congressof Prehistoric and Protohistoric Sciences, Vol. 1: Theoretical and Methodological Problems,ABACO, Forli, Italy, pp. 101-106.Kohler, T. A., and Parker, S. C. (1986). Predictive models for archaeological resource location. InSchiffer, M. B. (ed.), Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory, Vol. 9, Academic Press,New York, pp. 397-452.190KvammeKotsakis, K., Andreau, S., Vargas, A., and Papoudas, D. (1995). Reconstructing a Bronze Age site withCAD. In Huggett, J., and Ryan, N. (eds.), Computer Applications and Quantitative Methods inArchaeology, 1994, BAR International Series, No. 600, Oxford, pp. 181-188.Kuna, M., and Adelsbergerova', D. (1995). Prehistoric location preferences: An application of GIS tothe Vinorsky Potok project, Bohemia, the Czech Republic. In Lock, G., and StanCiC, Z. (eds.),Archaeology and Geographical Information Systems: A European Perspective, Taylor and Francis,London, pp. 117-132.Kvamme, K. L. (1984). Models of prehistoric site location near Pinon Canyon, Colorado. In Condie,C. J. (ed.), The Archaeology of Northeastern New Mexico, New Mexico Archaeological Council,Albuquerque, pp. 347-370.Kvamme, K. L. (1989). Geographic information systems in regional archaeological research and datamanagement. In Schiffer, M. B. (ed.), Archaeological Method and Theory, Vol. 1, University ofArizona Press, Tucson, pp. 139-202.Kvamme, K. L. (1990a). One-sample tests in regional archaeological analysis: New possibilities throughcomputer technology. American Antiquity 55: 367-381.Kvamme, K. L. (1990b). The fundamental principles and practice of predictive archaeological mod-eling. In Voorrips, A. (ed.), Mathematics and Information Science in Archaeology: A FlexibleFramework, Studies in Modern Archaeology, Vol. 3, Holes-Verlag, Bonn, Germany, pp. 257-295.Kvamme, K. L. (I992a). Geographic information systems and archaeology. In Lock, G., and Moffett, J.(eds.), Computer Applications and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology, 1991, BAR InternationalSeries, No. S577, Oxford, pp. 77-84.Kvamme, K. L. (1992b). Terrain form analysis of archaeological location through geographic informa-tion systems. In Lock, G., and Moffett, J. (eds.), Computer Applications and Quantitative Methodsin Archaeology 1991, BAR International Series, No. S577, Oxford, pp. 127-136.Kvamme, K. L. (1992c). A predictive site location model on the High Plains: An example with anindependent test. Plains Anthropologist 37: 19-40.Kvamme, K. L. (1992). Spatial statistics and GIS: An integrated approach. In Andresen, J., Madsen,T., and Scollar, I. (eds.), Computing the Past: Computer Applications and Quantitative Methodsin Archaeology, CAA92, Aarhus University Press, Aarhus, Denmark, pp. 91-103.Kvamme, K. L. (1994). Ranter's cornerŠGIS graphics vs. spatial statistics: How do they fit together?Archaeological Computing Newsletter 38: 1-2.Kvamme, K. L. (1995). A view from across the water: The North American experience in archaeologicalGIS. In Lock, G., and StanCiC, Z. (eds.), Archaeology and Geographical Information Systems: AEuropean Perspective, Taylor and Francis, London, pp. 1-14.Kvamme, K. L. (1996a). Investigating chipping debris scatters: GIS as an analytical engine. In MaschnerH. D. G. (ed.), New Methods, Old Problems: Geographic Information Systems in Modem Archae-ological Research, Occasional Paper, No. 23, Center for Archaeological Investigations, SouthernIllinois University, Carbondale, pp. 38-71.Kvamme, K. L. (1996b). A proton magnetometry survey at Navan Fort. Emania 14: 83-88.Kvamme, K. L. (1996c). Randomization methods for statistical inference in raster GIS contexts. InBietti, A., Cazzella, A., Johnson, I., and Voorrips, A. (eds.), The Colloquia of the XIII Interna-tional Congress of Prehistoric and Prolohistoric Sciences, Vol. 1: Theoretical and MethodologicalProblems, ABACO, Forli, Italy, pp. 107-114.Kvamme, K. L. (1997). Ranter's comerŠBringing the camps together: GIS and ED. ArchaeologicalComputing Newsletter 47: 1-5.Kvamme, K. L , and Jochim, M. A. (1989). The environmental basis of Mesolithic settlement. In Bon-sail, C. (ed.), The Mesolithic in Europe: Papers Presented at the Third International Symposium,John Donald Publishers, Edinburgh, pp. 1-12.Ladefoged, T. N,, McLachlan, S. M., Ross, S. C. L., Sheppard, P. J., and Sutton, D. G. (1995). G1S-based image enhancement of conductivity and magnetic susceptibility data from Ureturituri Paand Fort Resolution, New Zealand. American Antiquity 60: 471-481.Lang, L. (1994). GPS on the right trail. Government Technology 1: 28-31.Lang, N. A. R. (1993). From model to machine procurement and implementation of geographical infor-mation systems for county sites and monuments records. In Andresen, J., Madsen, T., and Scollar,I. (eds.), Computing the Past: Computer Applications and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology,CAA92, Aarhus University Press, Aarhus, Denmark, pp. 167-175.Recent Directions in GIS191Larsen, C. (ed.) (1992). Sites and Monuments: National Archaeological Recorris, The National Museumof Denmark, Copenhagen, pp. 185-199.Larson, P. (1975). Trend analysis in archaeology: A preliminary study of intrasite patterning, NorwegianArchaeological Review 8: 75-80.Lave, C. A., and March, J. G. (1975). An Introduction to Models in the Social Sciences, Harper andRow, New York.Limp, W. F. (1989). The Use of Multispectral Digital Imagery in Archeological Investigations, ResearchSeries No. 24, Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.Limp, W. F. (1991). Continuous cost movement models. In Behrens, C. A., and Sever, T. L. (eds.),Applications of Space Age Technology in Anthropology, National Aeronautics and Space Admin-istration, Science and Technology Laboratory, John C. Stennis Space Center, MS, pp. 237-250.Limp, W. F. (1992). The challenge of automated systems in archaeology. Federal Archeology Report5: 1-2.Limp, W. F. (1996). Developing methodologies in the analysis of spatially referenced data and theirimpacts on archaeological method and theory. In Bietti, A., Cazzella, A., Johnson, I., and Voorrips.A. (eds.). The Colloquia of the Xlll International Congress of Prehistoric and ProtohistoricSciences, Vol. 1: Theoretical and Methodological Problems, ABACO, Forli, Italy, pp. 115-126.Limp, W. F., and Gisiger, A. (1992). Continental scale archaeology studies using GIS. Federal Arche-ology Report 5: 3-6.Llobera, M. (1996). Exploring the topography of mind: GIS, social space and archaeology. Antiquity70: 612-622.Lock, G. R. (1993). GIS or CAD: What's in a name? Archaeological Computing Newsletter 37: 1-2.Lock, G. (1995). Archaeological computing, archaeological theory and moves toward contextualism. InHuggett, J., and Ryan, N. (eds.), Computer Applications and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology,1994, BAR International Series, No. 600, Oxford, pp. 13-18.Lock, G., and Harris, T. (1992). Visualizing spatial data: The importance of geographic informationsystems. In Reilly, P., and Rahtz, S. (eds.), Archaeology and the Information Age: A GlobalPerspective, Routledge, London, pp. 81-96.Lock, G. R., and Harris, T. M. (1996). Danebury revisited: An English Iron Age hillfort in a digital land-scape. In Aldenderfer, M., and Maschner, H. D. G. (eds.), Anthropology, Space and GeographicInformation Systems, Oxford University Press, New York, pp. 214-240.Madry, S. L. H. (1990). The realities of hardware. In Allen, K. M. S., Green, S. W., and Zubrow, E. B.W. (eds.), Interpreting Space: GIS and Archaeology, Taylor and Francis, London, pp. 173-183.Madry, S. L. H., and Crumley, C. L. (1990). An application of remote sensing and GIS in a regionalarchaeological settlement pattern analysis: The Arroux River Valley, Burgundy, France. In Allen,K. M. S., Green, S. W., and Zubrow, E. B. W. (eds.). Interpreting Space: GIS and Archaeology,Taylor and Francis, London, pp. 364-380.Madry, S. L. H., and Rakos, L. (1996). Line-of-sight and cost-surface techniques for regional researchin the Arroux River Valley. In Maschner H. D. G. (ed.), New Methods, Old Problems: GeographicInformation Systems in Modern Archaeological Research, Occasional Paper, No. 23, Center forArchaeological Investigations, Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, pp. 104-126.Madsen, T. (1996). GIS and Scandinavian archaeology: A tale from the real world. In Bietti, A.,Cazzella, A., Johnson, I., and Voorrips, A. (eds.), The Colloquia of the XIII International Congressof Prehistoric and Protohistoric Sciences, Vol. 1: Theoretical and Methodological Problems,ABACO, Forli, Italy, pp. 127-136.Marble, D. F. (1984). Geographic information systems: An overview. In Spatial Information Technolo-gies for Remote Sensing Today and Tomorrow, Proceedings of Pecora 9, IEEE, Silver Springs,MD, pp. 18-24.Maschner, H. D. G. (1996a). Geographic information systems in archaeology. In Maschner, H. D. G.(ed.), New Methods, Old Problems: Geographic Information Systems in Modern ArchaeologicalResearch, Occasional Paper, No. 23, Center for Archaeological Investigations, Southern IllinoisUniversity, Carbondale, pp. 1-24.Maschner, H. D. G. (1996b). The politics of settlement choice on the Northwest coast: GIS, cognition,and coastal landscapes. In Aldenderfer, M., and Maschner, H. D. G. (eds.), Anthropology, Spaceand Geographic Information Systems, Oxford University Press, New York, pp. 175-189.Maschner, H. D. G. (1996c). Review of Archaeology and Geographical Information Systems: A192KvammeEuropean Perspective [Lock. G., and StanCiC, Z. (eds.), 1995, Taylor and Francis, London]. Geoar-chaeology 11: 505-507.Maschner, H. D. G., and Stein, J. (1995). Multivariate approaches to site location on the northwestcoast of North America. Antiquity 69: 61-73.Massagrande, F. A. (1995). Using GIS with non-systematic survey data: The Mediterranean evidence. InLock, G., and StanCic', Z. (eds.), Archaeology and Geographical Information Systems: A EuropeanPerspective, Taylor and Francis, London, pp. 55-66.McClung de Tapia, E., and Tapia-Recillas, H. (1996). Statistical analysis using G1S in the studyof Prehispanic settlement location in the Teotihuacan region, Mexico. In Bietti, A., Cazzella,A., Johnson, I., and Voorrips, A. (eds.), The Colloquia of the XIII International Congress ofPrehistoric and Protohistoric Sciences, Vol. I: Theoretical and Methodological Problems,ABACO, Forli, Italy, pp. 137-148.Meffert, M. (1995). Spatial relations in Roman Iron Age settlements in the Assendelver polders, theNetherlands. In Lock, G., and Staniif, Z. (eds.), Archaeology and Geographical InformationSystems: A European Perspective, Taylor and Francis, London, pp. 287-300.Middleton, R., and Winstanley, D. (1993). GIS in a landscape archaeology context. In Andresen,J., Madsen, T., and Scollar, I. (eds.), Computing the Past: Computer Applications and Quanti-tative Methods in Archaeology, CAA92, Aarhus University Press, Aarhus, Denmark, pp. 151-158.Mikkelson, D. M., and Larsen, J. H. (1992). Recording archaeological sites in Norway. In Larsen, C.(ed.), Sites and Monuments: National Archaeological Records, The National Museum of Denmark,Copenhagen, pp. 71-80.Miller, P. (1995). How to look good and influence people: Thoughts on the design and interpretationof an archaeological GIS. In Lock, G., and StantiC, Z. (eds.), Archaeology and GeographicalInformation Systems: A European Perspective, Taylor and Francis, London, pp. 319-334.Miller, P. A. (1996). Digging deep: GIS in the city. In Kamermans, H., and Fennema, K. (eds.), In-terfacing the Past: Computer Applications and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology, CAA95,Vol. 2, Analecta Praehistorica Leidensia, No. 28, University of Leiden, Leiden, pp. 369-376.Murray, D. M. (1995). The management of archaeological information: A strategy. In Wilcock, J.,and Lockyear, K. (eds.), Computer Applications and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology 1993,BAR International Series, No. 598, Oxford, pp. 83-88.Music, B. (1995). On-site prospection in Slovenia: The case of Rodik. Archaeological ComputingNewsletter 43: 6-15.Newman, C. (1993). The Tara survey: Interim report. In Discovery Programme Reports I: ProjectResults 1992, Royal Irish Academy, Dublin, pp. 70-93.Nunez, M., Vikkula, A., and Kirkinen, T. (1995). Perceiving time and space in an isostatically risingregion. In Lock, G., and Stancic, Z. (eds.), Archaeology and Geographical Information Systems:A European Perspective, Taylor and Francis, London, pp. 141-152.Oppenshaw, S. (1991). A view on the GIS crisis in geography, or, using GIS to put Humty-Dumptyback together again. Environment and Planning A 23: 621 -628.Oswald, A. (1996). Restoring a thirteenth century castle wall using GIS. ARCNews 18: 26.Ozawa, K., Kato, T., and Tsude, H. (1995). Detection of beacon networks between ancient hill-fortsusing a digital terrain model based GIS. In Huggett, J., and Ryan, N. (eds.). Computer Appli-cations and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology, 1994, BAR International Series, No. 600,Oxford, pp. 157-162.Palumbo, G. (1993). JADIS (Jordan Antiquities Database and Information System): An example ofnational archaeological inventory and GIS applications. In Andresen, J., Madsen, T., and Scollar,I. (eds.), Computing the Past: Computer Applications and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology,CAA92, Aarhus University Press, Aarhus, Denmark, pp. 183-188.Parker, S. (1985). Predictive modeling of site settlement systems using multivariate logistics. In Carr,C. (ed.), For Concordance in Archaeological Analysis: Bridging Data Structure, QuantitativeTechnique, and Theory, Westport Publishers, Kansas City, MO, pp. 173-207.Parker, S. (1986). The role of geographic information systems in cultural resource management. InOpitz, B. K. (ed.). Geographic Information Systems in Government, Vol. I, A. Deepak Publishing,Hampton, VA, pp. 133-140.Recent Directions in GIS193Peterman, O. L. (1992). Geographic information systems: Archaeology's latest tool. Biblical Archae-ologist 55: 162-167.Petrie, L., Johnson, I., Cullen, B., and Kvamme, K. L. (1995). GIS in Archaeology: An AnnotatedBibliography, Archaeological Methods Series, No. 1, Sydney University, Sydney.Plog, F. T, and Hill, J. N. (1971). Explaining variability in the distribution of sites. In Gumerman, G.J. (ed.), The Distribution of Prehistoric Population Aggregates, Anthropological Reports, No. 1,Prescott College Press, Prescott, AZ, pp. 7-36.Potts, R., Jorstad, T., and Cole, D. (1996). The role of GIS in the interdisciplinary investigations atOlorgesailie, Kenya, a Pleistocene archaeological locality. In Aldenderfer, M., and Maschner,H. D. G. (eds.), Anthropology, Space and Geographic Information Systems, Oxford UniversityPress, New York, pp. 202-213.Preysler, J. B., and Blasco, C. (1996). Application of GIS to images and their processing: The Chiribi-quete Mountains Project. In Kamermans, H., and Fennema, K. (eds.), Interfacing the Past: Com-puter Applications and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology, CAA95, Vol. 2, Analecta Praehis-torica Leidensia, No. 28, University of Leiden, Leiden, pp. 353-358.Raper, J., (1989). Three Dimensional Applications in Geographic Information Systems, Taylor andFrancis, London.Renfrew, C., and Level, E. V. (1979). Exploring dominance: Predicting polities from centers. InRenfrew, C., and Cooke, K. L. (eds.), Transformations: Mathematical Approaches to CultureChange, Academic Press, New York, pp. 145-167.Reynoso, C., and Castro, D. (1994). VB-GIS 3D: A GIS specifically designed for archaeology. InJohnson, I. (ed.), Methods in the Mountains: Proceedings of UISPP Commission IV Meeting,Mount Victoria, Australia, Archaeological Methods Series, No. 2, Sydney University, Sydney, pp.135-142.Richards, J. D. (1996). Putting the site in its setting: GIS and the search for Anglo-Saxon settlementin Noithumbria. In Kamermans, H., and Fennema, K. (eds.), Interfacing the Past: ComputerApplications and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology, CAA95, Vol. 2, Analecta PraehistoricaLeidensia, No. 28, University of Leiden, Leiden, pp. 377-386.Robinson, H. (1993). The archaeological implications of a computerized integrated national heritageinformation system. In Andresen, J., Madsen, T., and Scollar, I. (eds.), Computing the Past:Computer Applications and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology, CAA92, Aarhus UniversityPress, Aarhus, Denmark, pp. 139-150.Romano, D. G., and Tolba, O. (1995). Remote sensing, GIS and electronic surveying: Reconstructingthe city plan and landscape of Roman Corinth. In Huggett, J., and Ryan, N. (eds.), ComputerApplications and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology, 1994, BAR International Series, No. 600,Oxford, pp. 163-174.Roorda, I. M., and Wiemer, R., (1992a). Towards a new archaeological information system in theNetherlands. In Lock, G., and Moffett, J. (eds.), Computer Applications and Quantitative Methodsin Archaeology, 1991, BAR International Series, No. S577, Oxford, pp. 85-88.Roorda, I., and Wiemer, R. (1992b). The ARCHIS Project: Towards a new national archaeologicalrecord in the Netherlands. In Larsen, C. (ed.), Sites and Monuments: National ArchaeologicalRecords, The National Museum of Denmark, Copenhagen, pp. 117-124.Ruggles, A. J., and Church, R. L. (1996). Spatial allocation in archaeology: An opportunity for reevalu-ation. In Maschner H. D. G. (ed.), New Methods, Old Problems: Geographic Information Systemsin Modern Archaeological Research, Occasional Paper, No. 23, Center for Archaeological Inves-tigations, Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, pp. 147-176.Ruggles, C. L. N., Medyckyj-Scott, D. J., and Gruffydd, A. (1993). Multiple viewshed analysis usingGIS and its archaeological application: A case study in northern Mull. In Andresen, J., Madsen,T., and Scollar, I. (eds.), Computing the Past: Computer Applications and Quantitative Methodsin Archaeology, CAA92, Aarhus University Press, Aarhus, Denmark, pp. 125-131.Ruggles, C. L. N., and Medyckyj-Scott, D. J. (1996). Site location, landscape visibility, and symbolicastronomy: A Scottish case study. In Maschner, H. D. G. (ed.), New Methods, Old Problems:Geographic Information Systems in Modern Archaeological Research, Occasional Paper, No. 23,Center for Archaeological Investigations, Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, pp. 127-146.Sanz, F. Q., Preysler, J. B., and Bosqued, C. B. (1995). An application of GIS to intra-site spatialanalysis: The Iberian Iron Age cemetery of E1 Cigarralejo (Murcia, Spain). In Huggett, J., and194KvammeRyan, N. (eds.), Computer Applications and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology, 1994, BARInternational Series, No. 600, Oxford, pp. 137-146.Savage, S. H. (1990a). GIS in archaeological research. In Allen, K. M. S., Green, S. W., and Zubrow,E. B. W. (eds.), Interpreting Space: GIS and Archaeology, Taylor and Francis, London, pp. 22-32.Savage, S. H. (1990b). Modelling the Late Archaic social landscape. In Allen, K. M. S., Green, S. W.,and Zubrow, E. B. W. (eds.), Interpreting Space: GIS and Archaeology, Taylor and Francis,London, pp. 330-355.Scollar, I. (1966). Computer treatment of magnetic measurements from archaeological sites. Archaeom-etry 9: 61-11.Scollar, I., Tabbagh, A., Hesse, A., and Herzog, I. (1990). Archaeological Prospecting and RemoteSensing, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.Sebastian, L., and Judge, J. W. (1988). Predicting the past: Correlation, explanation, and the use ofarchaeological models. In Judge, W. J., and Sebastian, L. (eds.), Quantifying the Present andPredicting the Past: Theory, Method, and Application of Archaeological Predictive Modeling,U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Land Management, Denver, pp. 1-18.Shennan, S. (1988). Quantifying Archaeology, Academic Press, San Diego.Shermer, S. J., and Tiffany, J. A. (1985). Environmental variables as factors in site location: An examplefrom the upper Midwest. Midcontinental Journal of Archaeology 10: 215-240.Snow, D. R. (1994). Using Maplnfo to map archaeological data. In Johnson, I. (ed.). Methods in theMountains: Proceedings of UlSPP Commission IV Meeting, Mount Victoria, Australia, Archae-ological Methods Series, No. 2, Sydney University, Sydney, pp. 143-148.Snow, D. R. (1996). GIS applications in North America. In Bietti, A., Cazzella, A., Johnson, I.,and Voorrips, A. (eds.), The Colloquia of the XIII International Congress of Prehistoric andProtohistoric Sciences, Vol. 1: Theoretical and Methodological Problems, ABACO, Forli, Italy,pp. 159-168.StanciC, Z. (1994). Locational analysis and settlement studies with GIS. In Johnson, I. (ed.), Methodsin the Mountains: Proceedings of UISPP Commission IV Meeting, Mount Victoria, Australia,Archaeological Methods Series, No. 2, Sydney University, Sydney, pp. 73-80.Stancic, Z., and Gaffney, V. (1996). GIS based analysis of the population trends on the island of BraC inCentral Dalmatia. In Bietti, A., Cazzella, A., Johnson, I., and Voorrips, A. (eds.), The Colloquiaof the X1I1 International Congress of Prehistoric and Protohistoric Sciences, Vol. 1: Theoreticaland Methodological Problems, ABACO, Forli, Italy, pp. 169-184.Stancic, Z., Dular, J., Gaffney, V., and Tecco-Hvala, S. (1995). A GIS-based analysis of later prehistoricsettlement patterns in Dolenjska, Slovenia. In Wilcock, J., and Lockyear, K. (ed.), ComputerApplications and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology, 1993, BAR International Series, No. 598,Oxford, pp. 161-164.Star, J., and Estes, J. E. (1990). Geographic Information Systems: An Introduction, Prentice-Hall,Englewood Cliffs, NJ.Stead, S. (1995). Humans and PETS in space. In Lock, G., and Stancic, Z. (eds.), Archaeology andGeographical Information Systems: A European Perspective, Taylor and Francis, London, pp.313-318.Steele, J., Sluckin, T. J., Denholm, D. R., and Gamble, C. S. (1996). Simulating hunter-gatherer col-onization of the Americas. In Kamermans, H., and Fennema, K. (eds.). Interfacing the Past:Computer Applications and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology, CAA95, Vol. 2, Analecta Prae-historica Leidensia, No. 28, University of Leiden, Leiden, pp. 223-227.Thomas, D. H., and Bellinger, R. L. (1976). Prehistoric Pinon Ecotone Settlements of the Upper ReeseRiver Valley, Central Nevada, Anthropological Papers, Vol. 53, No. 3, American Museum ofNatural History, New York.Unwin, D. (1981) Introductory Spatial Analysis, Methuen, London.van Leusen, P. M. (1993). Cartographic modelling in a cell-based GIS. In Andresen, J., Madsen, T.,and Scollar, I. (eds.), Computing the Past: Computer Applications and Quantitative Methods inArchaeology, CAA92, Aarhus University Press, Aarhus, Denmark, pp. 105-122.van Leusen, P. M. (1996). GIS and location modeling in Dutch archaeology: A review of currentapproaches. In Maschner, H. D. G. (ed.). New Methods, Old Problems: Geographic InformationSystems in Modern Archaeological Research, Occasional Paper, No. 23, Center for ArchaeologicalInvestigations, Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, pp. 177-197.Recent Directions in GIS195Van West, C. (1994). Modeling Prehistoric Agricultural Productivity in Southwestern Colorado: AGIS Approach, Department of Anthropology Reports of Investigations, No. 67, Washington StateUniversity, Pullman.Van West, C., and Kohler, T. A. (1996). A time to rend, a time to sew: New perspectives on NorthernAnasazi sociopolitical development in late prehistory. In Aldenderfer, M., and Maschner, H. D.G. (eds.), Anthropology, Space and Geographic Information Systems, Oxford University Press,New York, pp. 107-131.Vikkula, A. (1994). Stone Age environment and landscape changes on the eastern Finnish Lake District.In Johnson, I. (ed.), Methods in the Mountains: Proceedings of UISPP Commission IV Meeting,Mount Victoria, Australia, Archaeological Methods Series, No. 2, Sydney University, Sydney, pp.91-98.Vita-Finzi, C., and Higgs, E. S. (1970). Prehistoric economy in the Mount Carmel area of Palestine:Site catchment analysis. Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 36: 1-37.Wansleeben, M. (1988). Applications of geographical information systems in archaeological research.In Rahtz, S. P. Q. (ed.), Computer and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology, 1988, Vol. 2, BARInternational Series, No. 446 (ii), Oxford, pp. 435-451.Wansleeben, M., and Verhart, L. B. M. (1995). GIS on different spatial levels and the Neolithizationprocess in the south-eastern Netherlands. In Lock, G., and StanCiC, Z. (eds.), Archaeology andGeographical Information Systems: A European Perspective, Taylor and Francis, London, pp.153-170.Warren, R. E. (1990a). Predictive modelling in archaeology: A primer. In Allen, K. M. S., Green,S. W., and Zubrow, E. B. W. (eds.), Interpreting Space: GIS and Archaeology, Taylor and Francis,London, pp. 90-111.Warren, R. E. (1990b). Predictive modeling of archaeological site location: A case study in the Midwest.In Allen, K. M. S., Green, S. W., and Zubrow, E. B. W. (eds.), Interpreting Space: GIS andArchaeology, Taylor and Francis, London, pp. 201-215.Wheatley, D. (1993). Going over old ground: GIS, archaeological theory and the act of perception. InAndresen, J., Madsen, T., and Scollar, I. (eds.), Computing the Past: Computer Applications andQuantitative Methods in Archaeology, CAA92, Aarhus University Press, Aarhus, Denmark, pp.133-137.Wheatley, D. (1995a). The impact of information technology on the practice of archaeological manage-ment. In Cooper, M. A., Firth, A., Carman, J., and Wheatley, D. (eds.), Managing Archaeology,Routledge, London, pp. 163-174.Wheatley, D. (1995b). Cumulative viewshed analysis: A GIS-based method for investigating intervis-ibility, and its archaeological application. In Lock, G., and Stands, Z. (eds.), Archaeology andGeographical Information Systems: A European Perspective, Taylor and Francis, London, pp.171-186.Wheatley, D. (1996). The use of GIS to understand regional variation in Earlier Neolithic Wessex. InMaschner, H. D. G. (ed.), New Methods, Old Problems: Geographic Information Systems in Mod-ern Archaeological Research, Occasional Paper, No. 23, Center for Archaeological Investigations,Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, pp. 75-103.Wiemer, R. (1995). Another way to deal with maps in archaeological GIS. In Lock, G., and Stancic,Z. (eds.), Archaeology and Geographical Information Systems: A European Perspective, Taylorand Francis, London, pp. 301-312.Williams, I., Limp, W. F., and Briuer, F. L. (1990). Using geographic information systems and ex-ploratory data analysis for archaeological site classification and analysis. In Allen, K. M. S.,Green, S. W., and Zubrow, E. B. W. (eds.), Interpreting Space: GIS and Archaeology, Taylor andFrancis, London, pp. 239-273.Zubrow, E. B. W. (1990a). The fantasies of GIS software. In Allen, K. M. S., Green, S. W., andZubrow, E. B. W. (eds.), Interpreting Space: GIS and Archaeology, Taylor and Francis, London,pp. 184-194.Zubrow, E. B. W. (1990b). Modelling and prediction with geographic information systems: A demo-graphic example from prehistoric and historic New York. In Allen, K. M. S., Green, S. W., andZubrow, E. B. W. (eds.), Interpreting Space: GIS and Archaeology, Taylor and Francis, London,pp. 307-318.Zubrow, E. B. W. (1994). Knowledge representation and archaeology: A cognitive example using196KvammeGIS. In Renfrew, C., and Zubrow, E. B. W. (eds.), The Ancient Mind: Elements of CognitiveArchaeology, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 107-118.Zubrow, E. (1997). Clusters of death, pockets of survival: Dynamic modelling and GIS. In van derLeeuw, S., and McGlade, J. (eds.), Time, Process and Structured Transformation in Archaeology,Routledge, London, pp. 216-253.Zubrow, E. B. W., and Harbaugh, J. W. (1978). Archaeological prospecting: Kriging and simulation.In Hodder, I. (ed.), Simulation Studies in Archaeology, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,pp. 109-122.BIBLIOGRAPHY OF RECENT LITERATUREAckerly, N. W. (1994). Analyses of historic New Mexican acequia systems using GIS technology. GeoInfo Systems 4: 20-21.Aldenderfer, M, and Maschner, H. D. 0. (eds.) (1996). Anthropology, Space and Geographical Infor-mation Systems, Oxford University Press, New York.Allen, K. M. S. (1990). Manipulating space: A commentary on GIS applications. In Allen, K. M. S.,Green, S. W., and Zubrow, E. B. W. (eds.), Interpreting Space: GIS and Archaeology, Taylor andFrancis, London, pp. 197-200.Allen, K. M. S. (1990). Modelling early historic trade in the eastern Great Lakes using geographicinformation systems. In Allen, K. M. S., Green, S. W., and Zubrow, E. B. W. (eds.), InterpretingSpace: GIS and Archaeology, Taylor and Francis, London, pp. 319-329.Allen, K. M. S., Green S. W., and Zubrow, E. B. W. (eds.) (1990). Interpreting Space: GIS andArchaeology, Taylor and Francis, London.Andresen, J. T., Masden, T., and Scollar, I. (eds.) (1993). Computing the Past: Computer Applicationsand Quantitative Methods in Archaeology, CAA1992, Aarhus University Press, Aarhus, Denmark.Baena, F. J., Quesada, F., and Blasco, M. C. (1996). An application of GIS intra-site analysis to museumdisplay. In Kamermans, H., and Fennema, K. (eds.), Interfacing the Past: Computer Applica-tions and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology, CAA95, Vol. 2, Analecta Praehistorica Leidensia,No. 28, University of Leiden, Leiden, pp. 465-471.Bietti, A., Cazzella, A., Johnson, I., and Voorrips, A. (eds.) (1996). The Colloquia of the XIII Interna-tional Congress of Prehistoric and Protohistoric Sciences, Vol. 1: Theoretical and MethodologicalProblems, ABACO, Forli, Italy.Biro, K. T. (1996). Simple fun: Interactive computer demonstration program on the exhibition ofthe Szentgal-Tuzkoveshegy prehistoric industrial area. In Kamermans, H., and Fennema, K.(eds.), Interfacing the Past: Computer Applications and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology,CAA95, Vol. 2, Analecta Praehistorica Leidensia, No. 28, University of Leiden, Leiden, pp. 429-432.Boaz, J. S., and Uleberg, E. (1995). The potential of GIS-based studies of Iron Age cultural landscapesin eastern Norway. In Lock, G., and StanCiC, Z. (eds.), Archaeology and Geographical InformationSystems: A European Perspective, Taylor and Francis, London, pp. 249-260.Bomba, P. E., Carstens, K., and Brown, A. K. (1993). A cartographic geographic information systemfor the archaeological study of Fort Jefferson, Kentucky. In Proceedings of the 13th Annual ESR1User Conference, Palm Springs, California, Environmental Systems Research Institute, Redlands,CA, pp. 169-181.Califano, A. (1994). Rome links ancient cartographic data with GIS technology. Geo Info Systems 4:48-51.Castleford, J. (1992). Archaeology, GIS, and the time dimension: An overview. In Lock, G., andMoffett, J. (eds.), Computer Applications and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology, 1991, BARInternational Series, No. S577, Oxford, pp. 95-104.Chittenden, B. (1990). GIS technology used in American battlefield protection program. CRM Bulletin13:4.Christopherson, G. L., Guertin, D. P., and Borstad, K. A. (1996). Increasing our understanding ofancient Jordan with ARC/INFO. ARCNews 18: 27.Claxton, J. B. (1995). Future enhancements to GIS: Implications for archaeological theory. In Lock,Recent Directions in GIS197G., and StanCiC, Z. (eds.), Archaeology and Geographical Information Systems: A EuropeanPerspective, Taylor and Francis, London, pp. 335-348.Crumley, C. L., and Marquardt. W. H. (1990). Landscape: A unifying concept in regional analysis.In Allen, K. M. S., Green, S. W., and Zubrow, E. B. W. (eds.), Interpreting Space: G1S andArchaeology, Taylor and Francis, London, pp. 73-79.Dann, M. A., and Yerkes, R. W. (1994). Use of geographic information systems for the spatial analysis ofFrankish settlements in the Korinthia, Greece. In Kardulias, P. N. (ed.), Beyond the Site: RegionalStudies in the Aegean Area, University Press of America, Lanham, MD, pp. 289-311.Doganis, T. (1996). Parthenon renovation gets a big boost with GIS. ARCNews 18: 24.Ebert, J. I. (1996). Human origins investigated with digital mapping and GIS. ARCNews 18: 25.Flyg, P., and Bodin, U. (1996). GIS-applications in Swedish archaeology. In Bietti, A., Cazzella, A.,Johnson, I., and Voorrips, A. (eds.), The Colloquia of the XIII International Congress of Prehistoricand Protohistoric Sciences, Vol. 1: Theoretical and Methodological Problems, ABACO, Forli,Italy, pp. 67-68.Futato, E. M. (1991). GIS modelling of archaeological site locations: A low-tech approach. In Behrens,C. A., and Sever, T. L. (eds.), Applications of Space Age Technology in Anthropology, NationalAeronautics and Space Administration, Science and Technology Laboratory, John C. StennisSpace Center, MS, pp. 95-110.Gaffney, V., and StanCiC, Z. (1991). Predicting the past: GIS and archaeology. Geo-Information-Systeme4: 27-32.Gaffney, V., and Stancic, Z. (1992). Diodorus Siculus and the island of Hvar, Dalmatia: Testing the textwith GIS. In Lock, G., and Moffett, J. (eds.), Computer Applications and Quantitative Methodsin Archaeology, 1991, BAR International Series, No. S577, Oxford, pp. 113-123.Gaffney, V., and Stancic, Z. (1994). GIS and historical archaeology: The case of the island of Hvar inCroatia. Archeologia E Calcolatori 5: 257-268.Gaffney, V., Staniic.Z., and Farley, J. (1993). Geographical information systems, territorial analysis andprehistoric agriculture on the island of Hvar, Dalmatia. In Fabis, M., Kuzma, I., and Markova, K.(eds.), Actes du Xlle Congres International des Sciences Pre- et Proto-Historiques, Bratislava, 1-7Septembre 1991, Institut Archeologique de I'Academic Slovaque des Sciences a Nitra, Bratislava,pp. 407-415.Gillings, M. (1996). Not drowning but waving? Re-humanizing GIS, the Tisza flood plain revisited.In Bietti, A., Cazzella, A., Johnson, I., and Voorrips, A. (eds.), The Colloquia of the XIII Interna-tional Congress of Prehistoric and Protohistoric Sciences, Vol. 1 Ł' Theoretical and MethodologicalProblems, ABACO, Forli, Italy, pp. 69-84.Goodchild, M. (1996). Geographic information systems and spatial analysis in the social sciences. InAldenderfer, M., and Maschner, H. D. G. (eds.), Anthropology, Space and Geographical Infor-mation Systems, Oxford University Press, New York, pp. 241-250.Green, S. W. (1990). Sorting out settlement in southeastern Ireland: Landscape archaeology and geo-graphic information systems. In Allen, K. M. S., Green, S. W., and Zubrow, E. B. W. (eds.),Interpreting Space: GIS and Archaeology, Taylor and Francis, London, pp. 356-363.Hall, N. K., and Sale, K. (1994). Where art thou? The AIATSIS rock art database and GIS project 1993.In Johnson, I. (ed.), Methods in the Mountains: Proceedings of UISPP Commission IV Meeting,Mount Victoria, Australia, Archaeological Methods Series, No. 2, Sydney University, Sydney,pp. 53-60.Huggett, J. W. (1992). Integrating databases and graphics: A prelude to geographic information systems.Archaeological Computing Newsletter 30: 4-7.Jackson, J. M. (1990). Building and historic settlement database in GIS. In Allen, K. M. S., Green,S. W., and Zubrow, E. B. W. (eds.), Interpreting Space: GIS and Archaeology, Taylor and Francis,London, pp. 274-283.Jacobson, E., Meachan, J., and Cutting, D. (1994). Patterns on the steppe: Applying GIS to the archae-ology of the Altay Mountains. Geo Info Systems 4: 32-45.Johnson, I. (1996). Desktop mapping and raster GIS: Best of both worlds? In Bietti, A., Cazzella, A.,Johnson, I., and Voorrips, A. (eds.), The Colloquia of the XIII International Congress of Prehistoricand Protohistoric Sciences, Vol. 1: Theoretical and Methodological Problems, ABACO, Forli,Italy, pp. 85-92.Johnson, J. K. (1990). Settlement patterns, GIS, remote sensing and the late prehistory of the Black198KvammePrairie in east central Mississippi. In Behrens, C. A., and Sever, T. L. (eds.), Applications of SpaceAge Technology in Anthropology, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Science andTechnology Laboratory, John C. Stennis Space Center, MS, pp. 111-119.Katsaridis, P., and Tsigourakos, P. (1993). The use of GIS in land use planning for the protection ofthe Delfi hinterland (Greece). In Proceedings of the 13th Annual ESRI User Conference, PalmSprings, California. Environmental Systems Research Institute, Redlands, CA pp. 321-327.Knapp, A. B., and Johnson, I. (1994). Quantifying survey data from Cyprus: The use of aerial photosfor field recording and GIS input. In Johnson, I. (ed.). Methods in the Mountains: Proceedingsof UISPP Commission IV Meeting, Mount Victoria, Australia, Archaeological Methods Series,No. 2, Sydney University, Sydney, pp. 157-164.Knoerl, J. J. (1995). Mapping history using geographic information systems. The Public Historian 13:97-108.Krist Jr., F. J., and Brown, D. G. (1995). GIS modelling of Paleo-Indian period caribou migration andviewsheds in northeastern lower Michigan. Photograminetric Engineering and Remote Sensing60: 1129-1137.Kvamme, K. L. (1990). GIS algorithms and their effects on regional archaeological analysis. In Allen,K. M. S., Green, S. W., and Zubrow, E. B. W. (eds.), Interpreting Space: GIS and Archaeology,Taylor and Francis, London, pp. 112-126.Kvamme, K. L. (1990). Predictive cultural resource modeling at Pinon Canyon: 1984-85. In Andrefsky,W. (ed.), An Introduction to the Archaeology of Pinon Canyon, Southeastern Colorado, VolumeI: Background and Methods, National Park Service, Rocky Mountain Regional Office, Denver,pp. 6-83.Kvamme, K. L. (1993). Computer methods: Geographic information systems (Appendix. B). In Haas,J., and Creamer, W., Stress and Warfare Among the Kayenta Anasazi of the Thirteenth CenturyA. D., Fieldiana Anthropology New Series, No. 21, Field Museum of Anthropology, Chicago,pp. 171-180.Lock, G., and Stancic, Z. (eds.) (1995). Archaeology and Geographical Information Systems: A Euro-pean Perspective, Taylor and Francis, London.Marozas, B. A., and Zack, J. A. (1990). GIS and archaeological site location. In Allen, K. M. S., Green,S. W., and Zubrow, E. B. W. (eds.), Interpreting Space: GIS and Archaeology, Taylor and Francis,London, pp. 165-172.Martlew, R. (1996). The contribution of GIS to the study of landscape evolution in the Yorkshore Dales,UK. In Kamermans, H., and Fennema, K. (eds.), Interfacing the Past: Computer Applications andQuantitative Methods in Archaeology, CAA95, Vol. 2, Analecta Praehistorica Leidensia, No. 28,University of Leiden, Leiden, pp. 293-296.Maschner, H. D. G. (ed.) (1996). New Methods, Old Problems: Geographic Information Systems inModem Archaeological Research, Occasional Paper, No. 23, Center for Archaeological Investi-gations, Southern Illinois University, Carbondale.Maschner, H. D. G. (1996). Theory, technology, and the future of geographic information systems inarchaeology. In Maschner, H. D. G. (ed.), New Methods, Old Problems: Geographic InformationSystems in Modern Archaeological Research, Occasional Paper, No. 23, Center for ArchaeologicalInvestigations, Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, pp. 301-308.Massagrande, F. A. (1995). A GIS approach to the study of non-systematically collected data: Acase study from the Mediterranean. In Huggett, J., and Ryan, N. (eds.), Computer Applicationsand Quantitative Methods in Archaeology, 1994, BAR International Series, No. 600, Oxford,pp. 147-156.Massagrande, F. (1996). The Romans in southwestern Spain: Total conquest or partial assimilation?Can GIS answer? In Kamermans, H:, and Fennema, K. (eds.), Interfacing the Past: ComputerApplications and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology, CAA95, Vol. 2, Analecta PraehistoricaLeidensia, No. 28, University of Leiden, Leiden, pp. 325-330.Mytum, H. (1996). Intrasite patterning and the temporal dimension using GIS: The example ofKellington churchyard. In Kamermans, H., and Fennema, K. (eds.), Interfacing the Past: ComputerApplications and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology, CAA95, Vol. 2, Analecta PraehistoricaLeidensia, No. 28, University of Leiden, Leiden, pp. 363-367.Nuestupny, E. (1995). Beyond GIS. In Lock, G., and StanCiC, Z. (eds.). Archaeology and GeographicalInformation Systems: A European Perspective, Taylor and Francis, London, pp. 133-140.Recent Directions in GIS199Ogleby, C. (1994). Geographic information systems in archaeology and anthropology: A case studyfrom the Arawe Islands, Papua New Guinea. In Johnson, I. (ed.), Methods in the Mountains: Pro-ceedings of UISPP Commission IV Meeting, Mount Victoria, Australia, Archaeological MethodsSeries, No. 2, Sydney University, Sydney, pp. 99-114.Peterman, G. L. (1993). GIS and archaeology in Jordan. In Andresen, J., Madsen, T., and Scollar, I.(eds.), Computing the Past: Computer Applications and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology,CAA92, Aarhus University Press, Aarhus, Denmark, pp. 189-192,Peterson, J., and Smith, V. J. R. (1995). A GIS study of potential traces of a Roman cadastre andsoil types in Romney marsh. In Wilcock, J., and Lockyear, K. (eds.), Computer Applicationsand Quantitative Methods in Archaeology, 1993, BAR International Series, No. 598, Oxford,pp. 155-158.Phillips, J. C., and McKenzie, C. L. (1992). Archaeology and the Geographic Analysis Support System:An Evaluation of a Soil Conservation Service Model of Archaeological Site Locations in SantaRosa County, Florida, Report of Investigations, No. 47, Archaeology Insitute, University of WestFlorida, Pensacola.Rahtz, S. P. Q. (1992). GISsing the henge and making it cry. Archaeological Computing Newsletter30: 8-9.Reynoso, C., (1994). VB-GIS 3D: A development report on a GIS model for archaeology. Archaeo-logical Computing Newsletter 38: 3-7.Romano, D. G., and Tolba, O. (1996). Remote sensing and GIS in the study of Roman centuriation inthe Corinthia, Greece. In Kamermans, H., and Fennema, K. (eds.), Interfacing the Past: ComputerApplications and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology, CAA95, Vol. 2, Analecta PtaehistoricaLeidensia, No. 28, University of Leiden, Leiden, pp. 457-463.Ross, W., Dallas, A., Parker, D., and Milder, D. W. (1995). GIS principles to an English country house:The Brodsworth Hall project. In Wilcock, J., and Lockyear, K. (eds.), Computer Applicationsand Quantitative Methods in Archaeology, 1993, BAR International Series, No. 598, Oxford,pp. 259-262.Ruggles, C. (1992). Abstract data structures for GIS applications in archaeology. In Lock, G., andMoffett, J. (eds.), Computer Applications and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology, 1991, BARInternational Series, No. S577, Oxford, pp. 107-112.Saile, T., and Zimmermann, A. (1996). Cattle or crops. Applications of GIS in central Germany. InBietti, A., Cazzella, A., Johnson, I., and Voorrips, A. (eds.), The Colloquia of the X11I Interna-tional Congress of Prehistoric and Protohistoric Sciences, Vol. 1: Theoretical and MethodologicalProblems, ABACO, Forli, Italy, pp. 149-158.Smith, N. (1995). Towards a study of ancient Greek landscapes: The Perseus GIS. In Lock, G., andStanciC, Z. (eds.), Archaeology and Geographical Information Systems: A European Perspective,Taylor and Francis, London, pp. 239-248.Spikins, P. (1995). 'Vitual landscapes': GIS and lithic scatters. In Schofield, A. J. (ed.), Lithics inContext, Lithic Studies Society Occasional Paper, No. 5, British Museum, London, pp. 95-104.Stine, L. F., and Stine, R. S. (1990). GIS, archaeology, and freedom of information. In Allen, K. M. S.,Green, S. W., and Zubrow, E. B. W. (eds.), Interpreting Space: GIS and Archaeology, Taylor andFrancis, London, pp. 54-64.Stine, R. S., and Decker, T. D. (1990). Archaeology, data integration and GIS. In Allen, K. M. S.,Green, S. W., and Zubrow, E. B. W. (eds.). Interpreting Space: GIS and Archaeology, Taylor andFrancis, London, pp. 134-140.Stine, R. S., and Lanter, D. P. (1990). Considerations for archaeology database design. In Allen, K. M.S., Green, S. W., and Zubrow, E. B. W. (eds.), Interpreting Space: GIS and Archaeology, Taylorand Francis, London, pp. 80-89.Stoddart, S., Belcher, M., and Harrison, A. (1996). L'applicazione del GIS all'Etruria meridionale. InBietti, A., Cazzella, A., Johnson, I., and Voorrips, A. (eds.), The Colloquia of the XIII Interna-tional Congress of Prehistoric and Protohistoric Sciences, Vol. 1: Theoretical and MethodologicalProblems, ABACO, Forli, Italy, pp. 185-192.van Leusen, P. M. (1995). GIS and archaeological resource management: A European agenda. In Lock,G., and StanCic, Z. (eds.), Archaeology and Geographical Information Systems: A EuropeanPerspective, Taylor and Francis, London, pp. 27-42.van Waarden, N., and Wilson B. (1994). Developing a hydrological model of the Lake Condah fish200Kvammetraps in western Victoria using GIS. In Johnson, I. (ed.), Methods in the Mountains: Proceedingsof UISPP Commission IV Meeting, Mount Victoria, Australia, Archaeological Methods Series,No. 2, Sydney University, Sydney, pp. 81-90.Verhagen, P. (1996). The use of GIS as a tool for modelling ecological change and human occupation inthe Middle Aguas Valley (S. E. Spain). In Kamermans, H., and Fennema, K. (eds.), Interfacing thePast: Computer Applications and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology, CAA95, Vol. 2, AnalectaPraehistorica Leidensia, No. 28, University of Leiden, Leiden, pp. 317-324.Verhagen, P., and Me Glade, J. (1996). Spatialising dynamical modelling: A new opportunity for GIS.In Bietti, A., Cazzella, A., Johnson, I., and Voorrips, A. (eds.), The Colloquia of the XIIIInterna-tional Congress of Prehistoric and Protohistoric Sciences, Vol. 1: Theoretical and MethodologicalProblems, ABACO, Forli, Italy, pp. 193-208.Verhagen, P., McGlade, J., Risch, R., and Gili, S. (1995). Some criteria for modelling socio-economicactivities in the Bronze Age of south-east Spain. In Lock, G , and Stancic, Z. (eds.). Archaeologyand Geographical Information Systems: A European Perspective, Taylor and Francis, London,pp. 187-210.Voorrips, A. (1996). Archaeological theory and GIS, any relations? In Bietti, A., Cazzella, A., Johnson,I., and Voorrips, A. (eds.), The Colloquia of the XIII International Congress of Prehistoric andProtohistoric Sciences, Vol. 1: Theoretical and Methodological Problems, ABACO, Forli, Italy,pp. 209-214.Wheatley, D. (1996). Between the lines: The role of GIS-based predictive modelling in the inter-pretation of extensive survey data. In Kamermans, H., and Fennema, K. (eds.), Interfacing thePast: Computer Applications and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology, CAA95, Vol. 2, AnalectaPraehistorica Leidensia, No. 28, University of Leiden, Leiden, pp. 275-292.Williams, I., Parker, S., and Limp, W. F. (1990). The integration of GRASS, GIS, S, and regionaldatabase management: A comprehensive interactive environment for spatial analysis. In Voor-rips, A., and Ottaway, B. (eds.), New Tools from Mathematical Archaeology, Polish Academy ofSciences, Cracow, pp. 91-106.Winterhalder, B., and Evans, T. (1991). Preliminary GIS analysis of the agricultural landscape of CuyoCuyo. In Behrens, C. A., and Sever, T. L. (eds.), Applications of Space Age Technology in An-thropology, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Science and Technology Laboratory,John C. Stennis Space Center, MS, pp. 195-225.Zubrow, E. B. W. (1990). Contemplating space: A commentary on theory. In Allen, K. M. S., Green,S. W., and Zubrow, E. B. W. (eds.), Interpreting Space: CIS and Archaeology, Taylor and Francis,London, pp. 67-72.Zubrow, E. B. W., and Green, S. W. (1990). Coping with space: Commentary on data sources, hardwareand software. In Allen, K. M. S., Green, S. W., and Zubrow, E. B. W. (eds.), Interpreting Space:GIS and Archaeology, Taylor and Francis, London, pp. 129-133.Recent Directions in GIS201
