Journal  of  Archaeological  Research,  Vol. 7, No.  2, 1999Recent Directions and Developments  inGeographical  Information  SystemsKenneth L. Kvamme1Geographical  information  systems  (GIS)   are  tools for  handling  and  processingspatially  referenced  information  that have permeated  all facets  of archaeology, fre-quently  revolutionizing research by allowing easy access  to vast amounts of   infor-mation, new ways of data visualization that promote  insight through pattern recog-nition, and unique methodologies  that allow entirely new approaches to the  studyof  the past.  This  comprehensive  review examines  and  critiques  recent  advancesachieved  through  GIS  in  regional and  within-site  databases,  locational  analysisand modeling,  regional simulation, studies  of  landscape  perception  through inter-visibility  analysis, and models  of  spatial allocation,  territoriality, and site  access.The future prospects  of  GIS are enormous with the growth of  the Internet, the resul-tant linking  of  databases,  expected enhancements  in satellite  remote sensing, andthe increasing pervasiveness of global positioning  systems for  spatial data capture.KEY  WORDS:  geographical  information systems;  regional  analysis; spatial  databases; computercartography.If  there is a persistent  theme that emerges from  the chronicles ofcontemporary  scientific  cartography,  it is that the creation  of  a map  almostinevitably  leads to unexpected  revelations.—Hall, Mapping  the Next Millenium:  How  Computer-DrivenCartography  Is Revolutionizing  the  Face of  ScienceINTRODUCTIONCompetence in data analysis through applied statistics requires a considerableamount of  difficult  training. It  is therefore  not  surprising that  archaeologists  and1 Department of Anthropology and Center  for Advanced Spatial Technologies, University of Arkansas,Fayetteville, Arkansas 72701.1531059-0161/99/0600.0153$16.00/0 ©  1999  Plenum Publishing  Corporation
other  social  scientists have turned to user-friendly computers  to analyze their datathrough  computer  graphics  and  visualization software.  Simply by  pressing  a fewkeys  or  clicking  a  mouse  button,  researchers  can  instantaneously  display  vastamounts  of  information  graphically, in  multidimensional  views  and  formats  notpossible  only a few years  ago.  These tools are beginning to have an impact on theway we conduct  archaeological  studies because trends, patterns, and relationshipsare so easily  visualized, particularly when data  are presented in map form.Geographical  information systems  (GIS)  are collections  of interrelated  com-puter programs  designed  for  the  handling and  processing  of  spatially  referencedinformation. With data organized  on the basis of location,  unique capabilities  arederived.  Information  may  be  assembled  according  to  its  position  in  space  anddisplayed  in  the  form  of  maps,  allowing ready  visualization of  structure and  re-lationships in  complex  regional  data  sets  and creating  something  of  a revolutionin the transmission  of information. With  modern  computer  graphics  the GIS  mapgoes a long way beyond traditional cartographic representation  by utilizing contin-uous color palettes,  simultaneous displays of multiple spatial variables, simulatedthree-dimensional  views, overlays,  backdrops,  rotations,  profiles, and much  more.In short, GIS can be regarded  as an information visualization engine, but one withextensive  analysis,  data  generation,  and  manipulative capabilities.  These  tools,combined  in  one  place,  are  not  only  revolutionary, but  evolutionary. After  all,more  than half of  the human cortex  is involved in vision and  designed  to readilyperceive pattern in two, three,  or higher dimensional views. When viewing a map,the mind  erupts  with ideas  about  a landscape,  and  more  so with GIS.  There  is asynergism that derives  from  the possibility of comparing a host of environmental,economic,  or  social  variables  over  the  same  piece  of  ground,  and  GIS  permitsregions  of any  scale  to be employed,  from  that of a continent  to  the  microscopicedge of a stone  tool. It leaves  small wonder, then, that in little more than a decadeof reasonable access to GIS,  it and related  cartographic  tools have transformed theway academics  in virtually every  spatial science approach their data-interpretationand problem-solving  tasks.  [See  Hall (1992) for a pan-disciplinary summary.]Historical Roots and  OverviewAlthough significant use of GIS in archaeology  has existed for little more thana decade, multiple summaries  of its historical development  have already  appeared(Aldenderfer,   1996;  Harris  and  Lock,  1990,   1995;   Kvamme,   1995;   Maschner,1996a;  Savage,   1990a).  This  development  has  its  roots  in  the  1970s  with  com-puter  cartography  and computer-aided  drafting (CAD;  Clark,  1979;  Copp,  1977),the  linking  of  computer-drawn   maps  with  relational  databases   (Effland,    1979;Flude et al.,  1982), in quantitative spatial analyses  and their  mapped  by-products(Feder,  1979;  Larson,  1975), in views and uses of three-dimensional  terrain models154Kvamme
(Arnold,  1979;  Green  and Stewart,  1983), in remote sensing and image  processingapplications (Ebert,  1978;  Scollar,  1966), and in regional simulation and modelingexercises (Chadwick,  1979;  Zubrow  and  Harbaugh,  1978).  All  of  these  applica-tions, in some  way, performed  the functions we now do more routinely with  GIS.In the past decade numerous new GIS application areas and problem foci haveevolved, and the number of archaeological users of the technology and publicationsthat have resulted are legion. (A 1995 annotated bibliography of GIS in archaeologyby Petrie  et al. cites nearly 400 papers, for example.)  Aldenderfer  (1992) recentlyclassified  these  uses  of GIS in three  levels. The first involves using GIS to do thesimple things we have always done. The second employs GIS to perform  complexoperations  we  seldom  or  almost  never  do.  The  third  applies  GIS  in  brand newways that revolutionize our thinking and approaches to the study of archaeologicalphenomena.  Yet,  very  few  overviews  and  critiques of  GIS  in  archaeology  havebeen  written. The  most  comprehensive  essay,  by  Kvamme  (1989),  is  nearly  adecade  old  and  predates  many  application  areas  of  the  technology  as  well  assome of the technology itself! More recent summary papers have focused only onparticular domains of GIS or are  mere  introductions to the technology  that  makeno  pretense  of  being  a  comprehensive  review  (e.g.,  Aldenderfer,  1996;  Harrisand  Lock,  1990,   1995;  Limp,  1996;  Maschner,  1996). This  situation begs  for anintensive examination of  archaeology  and  GIS  as  it exists  today.  To what extentdo we employ GIS to do complex things we seldom do or brand new revolutionarythings? What exactly are  archaeologists  doing  with  GIS?  Why  is  it  so popular?Is  it really useful?  Are  there  common  domains of  application and  inquiry? Thispaper  addresses these  questions.Our  tour  of  GIS  begins  with  a  brief  overview  of  its  capabilities for  thoseunfamiliar  with  the technology and points to  major  archaeological  references  onthe topic. The general  introduction continues with an examination of the profoundimpact of GIS on data exploration  and visualization and its influence on  archaeo-logical and other  scientific research.  I necessarily  review pattern discovery  in thesciences  and  its role  in theory  building and the scientific  cycle.With  state-supported   mandates  for cultural resource  databases  at  local,  re-gional,  and  national levels,  the  principal use of  GIS  already  lies  in this domain,and consequently our survey of applications begins  here.  Inevitably, every  regionaround the globe will some day move toward GIS or GIS-like databases  that link in-formation with maps. In recent  years, though, this GIS database concept  has playedan increasingly important role in site-level projects,  the next focus of our survey. Atthe  site level, extensive data  collection  through excavation and surface mappingsof artifacts, topography, and other features commonly occur, and GIS is necessaryto efficiently  manage these data and address fundamental  research and spatial anal-ysis questions. One kind of within-site information is derived from  ground-basedgeophysical prosection,  commonly employed  in northern Europe  and increasinglyin  North  America.  The  discussion  on  remote  sensing  anticipates  a  movement,Recent Directions in GIS155
already  underway, toward  GIS for handling and processing  these  complex  spatialdata  sets  and  incorporating  them  into  comprehensive  site  databases.  With  sen-sors  moved  off  the  ground  and  into  space, GIS  has  a functionality for analyzingand manipulating remotely  sensed  satellite  imagery, and  I review  archaeologicalapplications  in this domain  as well.The most exciting developments  in GIS are in the analytical arena, for it is herethat we actually see new research  topics  and strategies  never before   contemplated.Because GIS allows actual  landscapes  and environments to be digitally  captured,most  of  these  approaches  focus  in  some  way  on  locational  behavior,  landscapeuse,  settlement  choice, and territoriality  at the regional  level.  Although  there  wasinitially  wide  variation in approaches to these  topics,  distinctive and well-definedmethodologies  have evolved.  The first section  examines locational  analysis at theregional  level  where  a variety  of  statistical  analysis approaches  have been  madepossible through GIS to assess quantitatively site or settlement relationships withfeatures  of  environment  and  address  the  fundamental  question  of  why   peopleplaced  their  settlements  where  they  did.  The  second  section  builds  on  what  islearned  through  locational  analysis  by  combining  results  in  a multivariate senseto make predictive  statements  about archaeological  distributions.  Archaeologicalpredictive  modeling  is one of the earliest  applications  made  possible  by  GIS,  yetit continues to grow in importance  as a tool  for cultural resource  management  andplanning and, indeed,  now forms the basis  of a multimillion dollar  archaeologicalindustry.The  next  two  sections  move  away  from  a  heavy  environmental focus  andconsider  more  strongly the  social  landscape  and its influence on behavior.  Spatialallocation, the assignment of territories  to sites, has had a long history in  archaeol-ogy, and GIS certainly facilitates  these  approaches  in all their diverse forms  (e.g.,Thiessen  polygons, circular catchments).  GIS also allows more  realistic results byconsidering  the  cost  or difficulty  of movement  over  a landscape,  or  by weightingterritory  size by the perceived  influence of a center, for example. A new domain ofinquiry made possible  by GIS lies in intervisibility and viewshed studies (the latterrefers to all places visible from a point or points on a landscape). This capability al-lows examination of territoriality through estimated  visible areas, of defensibility,and of visual dominance  and has opened a pathway toward past cognition throughthe realization that sites  or  settlements  might be placed  so that certain  places  arevisible.The  final  analytical  section  of  simulation  broaches  a  topic  appropriate  forthe generation  of insights into any archaeological  domain. Through  GIS,  archae-ologists  have  simulated  subjects  as  diverse  as  lithic  scatter  formation  to likelypathways for the peopling  of the  New World. Moreover,  realistic  landscapes  maynow be  employed  in place  of  the featureless  plain assumption  of  earlier  regionalsimulations. Importantly, these  studies typically are multitemporal and illustrate adynamic capability that adds  rich new perspectives  to the study of the  past.156Kvamme
I close this essay with two concluding sections. The first examines the manycritiques  of  GIS  by  postmodernists,  the  principal  one  being  that GIS  fosters  anenvironmental  determinism  stemming  from  its  reliance  on  traditional forms  ofmapped data. Finally, I look at future  directions  the technology  will certainly takeand speculate on the possibilities  that will exist in an information-rich  world  witharchaeological  and other  GIS databases  on-line, linked, and available through theInternet. This review therefore takes us on a journey along many different pathways,each  facilitated or made possible by GIS.  The  state of the art  of research  in eachdomain is examined and examples from  the now prolific literature in many of  theseareas  are reviewed. The end result is a comprehensive summary of GIS in archae-ology  as it exists today that illustrates its usefulness, versatility, and limitations.Defining  GIS and Its CapabilitiesThe  definition  of  GIS  has  proven  to  be  an  elusive  task  (see  Fisher  andLindenberg,  1989). Early attempts focused on requisite software elements. Marble(1984), for example, demands  four components  including (1) a data input system,(2) a  system  for information  storage and retrieval, (3) an analysis, manipulation,data generation, and modeling engine, and  (4) a display and reporting capability.More  recent  characterizations emphasize  the  problem-solving  qualities of  GIS,as in: "a decision  support system involving the integration of spatially referenceddata in a problem solving environment"  (Cowen,  1988,  p.  155).A GIS database  has a defined region  as  its focus. Individual  map themes,  orvariables,  represent  distinct "layers" of  information within  the database  region.The  map  layers  are  spatially coregistered  to  a  particular coordinate  base  (e.g.,UTM,  longitude-latitude) insuring that any  locus  in one  coincides  with  the  sameplace  in  the others. Data  layers  may be  derived  from  digitized or  scanned  papermaps,  aerial  photographs,  or  satellite  imagery, for  example;  and  textual  or  otherinformation  (e.g., artifact locations)  may  be  keyed  in manually  or obtained  fromextant computer databases,  provided  they are  associated  with  spatial  coordinates(most  GIS  allow  translation between  various  coordinate  systems).  The primaryinformation  one  feeds  a  GIS  may  be  encoded  through an  in-house operation  orpurchased through government or commercial  sources.The  processing  power  of  the  computer  together  with  the  typical softwareflexibility  of  most  GIS  programs  allows  a  great  diversity of  secondary  layers  tobe  derived  analytically  from  the  primary data.  Digital  elevation  contours allowestimation  of  an  altitude surface  interpolated  systematically  across  the  databaseregion; these  elevation data might be employed  to determine all locations visiblefrom  a  point  or  points;  and  a  distance-to-water  layer  might be  generated   fromdigitized lake, river, and stream  locations,  for example. More complex and variedoperations  are illustrated below.Recent Directions in GIS157
Map  features  are  traditionally  displayed  through  use  of  three  cartographicdevices:  points, lines, and areas.  Point features include a mountain summit, a sur-veyor's  datum, or the  locus  of  a town  on  a small  scale map. Lines  are employedto represent rivers, roads,  or perhaps elevation  contours.  The area data type refersto  regions  of  homogeneity  such  as  lakes,  forests,  or  property  parcels.  A varietyof  symbol  types,  colors,  or  point  or  line styles  might be  used  to distinguish be-tween them.  Vector GIS possesses data structures and display formats that are mostallied  to  these  fundamental cartographic  types.  Point,  line, and  area  features arelocated  by spatial coordinates,  referred  to as topology.  This information  is distinctfrom  attributes,  which describe  particular characteristics  of  the  features.  An  ar-chaeological  site,  for  example,  is bounded  by  a  sequence  of  spatial  coordinates(the topology)  that locates  its perimeter;  linked with  it is a series  of attributes thatidentifies its number, name, ownership, cultural and temporal affiliation,  and othercharacteristics.Grid-based  or raster GIS represents  a distinctly different  approach  to spatialdata  handling. These  systems  control  two-dimensional matrices  of  numbers thatrepresent  variations  in  a  map  theme.  Topology  is controlled  by  row  and columnposition within the matrix or grid, while an individual value represents  an attributecode  or  measurement  at  a  particular grid  cell  locus.  A  layer portraying soil  dis-tributions  will  contain  a  numeric  soil  type  code  as  each  grid  element  while  anelevation  layer  will  hold  individual  altitude measurements,  for  example.  Spatialresolution  and accuracy is controlled by the area represented  by each grid element.Computer  storage requirements  can be enormous  if the database region  is large orthe  grid  cell  size  is small, but  several  data compaction  algorithms exist  that helpto mitigate this factor, especially  in spatially redundant layers such as soil  classes,where similar attribute codes  occur  over  broad  regions.Vector  GIS  is  required  whenever  precise  location  is  important, such  as  ina  cultural properties  management database,  or  when  accurate  area  or  perimeterdata are necessary.  Vector GIS is ideal for regional data management applicationsbecause the individual  points, lines, or  area  vectors  may be linked with data heldin  relational database  management  software, allowing the  instantaneous displayof the results of queries and searches  in map form. (This is well illustrated below.)Vector  GIS  also  can  produce  publication quality maps  composed  of traditionalpoint, line, and area features.Raster  GIS,  on the other hand, is spatially less precise  owing to its grid cellstructure.  Moreover,  line and  area  data  suffer  from jagged,  stair  step  edges  thatgenerally  cause  inaccurate  area  and  perimeter  estimates.  Yet,  spatial data  fromsatellites, scanned aerial photographs, geophysical survey data, or artifact frequen-cies per  grid  square  occur  naturally in  raster  structures  and  are easily  displayedby  these systems  as continuous tone  images  (using gray or color  values  assignedgrid  cell  by  grid  cell).  In  research  applications, most  archaeologists  have foundthe  numerical  processing  and  modeling  capabilities  of  raster  GIS  to  be clearly158Kvamme
advantageous, as sections  below demonstrate.  Whether raster or vector, most GISprograms  support  some  functionality  in the other domain; and point, line, or  areafeatures  can easily be converted from  one format to the other.GIS  allows an amazing array of  operations  to  be performed  on  spatial datasets,  some  of which fall  in the following domains.Map  redassification  generalizes a map from many to fewer categories. Thirty-five soil  classes  might be  reduced  to only  three,  indicating "good," "moderate,"and "poor" soils for maize cultivation, for example.Map  overlaying  combines categories  from  multiple map layers. If classes  A,B, and  C occur  in one  layer, and a, b, c, and d  in another, then an overlay couldproduce the intersection of all possible combinations: Aa, Ab, Ac, Ad, Ba, Bb, Be,Bd, Ca, Cb, Cc, and Cd.Map  algebra  is a uniquely  raster technique that permits algebraic  and  otheroperations  (e.g.,  addition,  subtraction, multiplication,  division, exponentiation,square roots, logarithms, means, diversity measures)  to be performed  within andbetween  map  layers on  a  grid  cell  by  grid cell  basis.  A  simple operation  mightbe: newlayer  =  0.3048*oldlayer,  where oldlayer  contains an elevation  in feet ineach  grid  unit,  "*"  signifies  multiply,  and  the  result held  in  newlayer  representselevations in meters. A more complex operation might map a regression  function ofthe form: newlayer = CO + C1*layerl + C2*layer2 + C3*layer3, where newlayerholds predicted agricultural yields based on soil quality (layer1), slope (layer2),ground  moisture (layer3),  and  CO-C3 are constants (the regression  intercept andweights).Boolean  operations  permit  manipulation of  binary maps  through  Booleanlogic.  These  procedures  include unions  (the "OR"  operation),  intersections  (the"AND"  operation), and negation (the "NOT"  operation).  If the soils layer indicates"good"  versus  "poor"  soil  (coded  as  1 and  0,  respectively)  and  the  slope  layerindicates  "level"  versus  "steep"  ground  (coded  as  1 and  0,  respectively),  thennewlayer1 = soils  OR slope  computes  the Boolean union where either good  soilsor level slopes or both occur, while newlayer2  = soils AND slope maps only thoseplaces where the intersection of good soil with level ground both occur at the sameplace.Distance  operations  compute distances  from  a target  locus or loci under lin-earity or cost-of-movement  assumptions. The  latter considers  land  cover,  groundsteepness, elevation changes,  and other factors. When combined  with map reclas-sification, distance surfaces can produce buffers, catchments, or Thiessen polygonsaround  places  of  interest.Terrain processing  allows, through interpolation, the creation of digital terrainmodels  (DTM)  from  point or contoured elevation data. Interrelationships betweenaltitudes then allow estimates of ground steepness (slope), aspect (azimuth), ridgeand  drainage  lines,  watershed  boundaries,  mesa  or  canyon  rim  settings,  lines ofsight, regions  visible, and much more.Recent  Directions in GIS159
Image processing  routines are  specifically designed  for  the handling of  im-agery  whether  from  satellites,  aerial  or  terrestrial  photography,  or  geophysicalsensors and occur  within  most raster  GIS.  These programs  perform  such tasks asdigital  image classification, rectification and  registration to  map  coordinate  sys-tems,  image cropping,  edge detection, high  and low pass filtering, and brightnessand contrast  improvements.Although any one of those domains is useful  in and of itself, their real poweris  derived  in  their  combination,   when  several  are  chained  together  to  achievecomplex  results that allow us to do brand new things (Aldenderfer,  1992).  A  moredetailed  examination  of  these domains  is beyond  the  scope  of  this  presentation,although  archaeological  demonstrations  of  them  are  presented  in  the  followingpages.  More  information  about  specific  GIS  methods  may  be  found  in  severalintroductory  articles written by  archaeologists  (e.g.,  Gaffney  and  Stancic,  1991;Kvamme,  1989,  1992a;Madry,  1990; Peterman,  1992; Wansleeben,  1988; Zubrow,1990a).Data  Analysis/Visualization  and Scientific  ResearchWhen  viewing people  working with  GIS,  one  soon  appreciates  how  oftenpatterns  or  relationships are discovered. Merely  by displaying maps  of  archaeo-logical sites with other spatial variables, new associations or tendencies frequentlyare realized.  For example,  in Snow (1996) diachronic mappings of Iroquoian  set-tlements reveal  a number of new insights. The essence of this computer  graphicsrevolution is its speed, its access to vast amounts of information (recently increasedmanyfold  by the World Wide Web), and the complexity of information that can beeasily portrayed.  With visualization tools like GIS,  archaeologists  are  encouragedto get more  intimately acquainted with their data  and to  search  for patterns.  As aconsequence,  great changes  are  underway in the manner  in which archaeologistsconduct their research,  and the intellectual climate may finally be right for it.Under processual  archaeology, "induction"  became  something of a bad wordas this  school  became  firmly  linked with  "deductive" reasoning,  which was  castas beginning with a priori specified theory followed by post  hoc testing with data.While  correct,  this  framework  represents  a  somewhat  narrow  view  of  scientificresearch.  To put this in perspective  we need  to ask ourselves:  "What  is the  sourceof  our  theoretical  ideas?" Most  of  us  realize  that  scientific  research  moves  backand  forth  between  theory  and data  in a repetitive  and  interactive  cycle.  Ideas  areobtained  from  somewhere;  we then compare  them to the world to find out  if theyare  correct.  We  might obtain  only  partial  confirmation and  need  to  modify  ourideas  in  the  face  of  reality,  which initiates a  new  cycle  of  testing  with  data  andtheorizing. This cycle, of course,  may be entered  anywhere. We might begin withan a priori  theory,  like central  place  theory, or alternatively, enter  the cycle in the160Kvamme
middle by exploring discrepancies  between  data  and theory  generated  by  others.Whatever the case, the heavy archaeological  focus on a priori theory and the  scornfrequently held for more data-grounded ideas is incorrect and limiting. Althoughempirical generalizations might misrepresent  some causal relationships, they canbe  a  tremendous  source  of  insight.  Bamforth  (1994)  notes  the  worth  of  theseinsights "for  those of  us who are interested  in seeing  the world as it is rather thanas we want it to be"  (emphasis original).Medical  research  provides  excellent examples.  Almost weekly the  press  re-ports  on new medical discoveries  that are not generally theoretical, but empirical,based on  statistical patterns  in data.  Some of them  are  well known  and currentlypopular: that aspirin or even red wine reduce the risk of heart disease, for example.Earlier statistical discoveries  that have had a far reaching impact on society  estab-lished  the linkage between  an exposure  to radiation and various cancers,  smokingand  lung cancer,  and  fatty  foods  with  coronary  disease.  These  findings  did  notcome about through a priori theorizing, but through diligent empirical research  bya host of institutions on independent and carefully controlled samples. In each casethis  work ultimately demonstrated  that causal relationships must exist, althoughinitially  few  or  no  theoretical  mechanisms  were  understood  that  might explainthese  relationships. Theory  comes  later  and  usually  through hard  work. In  thesecontexts  it  is  enough  that important  relationships  discovered  through statisticalpatterns  are shown to really exist.  It is discoveries  such as these that set scientistson  the  road  toward  theoretical  models  that explain  underlying causal  processesthrough  the scientific cycle of observation,  theorizing, testing,  modifying  theory,testing  again,  and  so  on.  Even  now,  some  50  years  after  Hiroshima,  we  barelyunderstand  at a theoretical  level  why  high doses of radiation induce cancers,  butwe have made considerable  progress.Computer visualization tools  like GIS provide an incredibly powerful mech-anism for identifying  patterns. Although maps  were originally tied to  landscapes,now anything that possesses spatial coordinates  may be mapped,  and at any  scalefrom  atomic  surfaces to intergalactic spaces. The first Landsat images from  spacerevealed  the remarkable structure of the earth's crust, while the first images of theocean  floor  from  Seasat's radar  altimeter  fully  revealed  the  nature of  mid-oceanridges  and  the structure of the continental  plates,  both of which radically alteredtheories and ideas about our planet (Hall,  1992, pp. 52-87). In an even larger realm,recent mappings of the cosmos aided by computer  visualization tools have revealedamazing  structures consisting  of  galactic filaments, clusters, and voids that  weretotally unexpected and have caused large revisions  in theory, even challenging theBig Bang (Geller,  1988;  de Lapparent  et al.,  1986).In  the  following pages  I  demonstrate   that  similar  new  discoveries   of  im-portance  are  occurring  in  archaeology,  largely  through GIS-based  visualization.Yet, while the benefits of data  visualization are clear, there  are potential  dangers.One complaint, too often justified in archaeology,  is that GIS merely makes  "prettyRecent  Directions in GIS161
pictures" or that there is little substance behind the stunning visual products (Lock,1995;  Madsen,  1996).  Another is that GIS graphic results are portrayed as "spatialanalyses"  while not long ago a formal  statistical analysis was required to  presentconclusions.  Additionally, we must recognize  that the human eye  can  be  easilyfooled.  It  might  perceive  patterns  in  an  image  that  do  not  really exist  or  fail  torecognize  trends that do. For this reason  a host  of recent papers have called for adual  approach  that links GIS visualization  with quantitative analysis (Harris andLock,  1995;  Kvamme,  1994;  Lock,  1995;  Lock  and  Harris,  1992).  Quantitativemeasures  of the strengths of patterns are desirable as a basis for comparison  withother  results or  samples,  for  example.  Moreover,  statistical  methods  can  informus of the  existence  of tendencies  or relationships that are difficult  or even  impos-sible to visualize.  Statistical  tests could  play a confirmatory role in  documenting"visually  apparent" results. At the same time, visualization tools remain essentialbecause simple quantitative measures  cannot  convey the nature of spatial  patternsin the same  way that an effective  graphic can.GIS AND DATABASE  MANAGEMENTGIS-driven  archaeological  databases  are  of  great benefit  to  researchers  andcultural  resource  managers  alike.  Yet,  in  my  view  they  can  become  an  end  inthemselves  and  do  not  well  illustrate the  exciting potential  or  power  of  GIS  inthe  analytical domain.  (Although ultimately they  may  be  essential  to  analysisas  principal  data  sources.)  Nevertheless,   the  chief  applications  area  of  GIS  inarchaeology  will undoubtedly lie in database development  and management; it isalready happening.Regional  DatabasesAs early as  1992, the volume Sites and Monuments: National ArchaeologicalRecords  (Larsen,  1992)  described  a  host  of  mostly European  national  databasemanagement efforts  that employed GIS or GIS-like  (computer cartography) tools.Similar  reports  now occur  frequently  throughout the  GIS  literature for  a host  ofcountries  and  regions  around  the  globe  (e.g.,  Aberg  and  Leech,  1992;  Arroyo-Bishop  and  Zarzosa,   1992;  Bampton  and  Hamilton,  1996;  Boaz  and  Uleberg,1993;  Bosqued  et al.,  1996;  Canouts,  1992;  Chartrand et al.,  1993;  Farley  et  al.,1990;  Guillot,  1992;  Guillot and Leroy,  1995; Harris and Lock,  1992; Lang,  1993;Massagrande,   1995;  Middleton  and  Winstanley,  1993;  Mikkelsen  and  Larsen,1992; Murray,  1995;  Palumbo,  1993;  Robinson,  1993;Roorda and Wiemer,  1992a;Stancic  and Gaffney,  1996).  Overviews of the historical development of informa-tion technology for cultural resource  databases,  from  a GIS perspective,  are given162Kvamme
